The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mahābhārata of Krishna-Dvaipāyana
Vyāsa, Volume 2

This eBook is for the usē of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
rē-usē it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mahābhārata of Krishna-Dvaipāyana Vyāsa, Volume 2
       Books 4, 5, 6 and 7

Translator: Kisārī Mōhana Gāṁgulī

Release Date: March 26, 2005 [EBook #15475]
Last Updated: November 6, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: YŪṬĪĒPHA-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAHĀBHĀRATA VOL 2 ***




Produced by John B. Harē. Please notify any corrections
to John B. Harē at www.sacred-texts.com





THE MAHĀBHĀRATA

of

Krishna-Dvaipāyana Vyāsa

BOOK 4

VIRĀṬA PARVA

Translated iṁṭō English Prose from the Original Sanskrit Text

by

Kisārī Mōhana Gāṁgulī

[1883-1896]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, 2003. Proofed at Distributed Proofing,
Juliet Sutherland, Project Manager. Additional proofing and formatting at
sacred-texts.com, by J. B. Harē.



SECTION I

(Pāṁḍava-Pravēśa Parva)

OM! Having bowed down to Nārāyaṇa, and Nārā, the most exalted of male
beings, and also to the goddess Sarasvatī, must the word Jāyā be uttered.

Janamējaya said, “How did my great-grandfathers, afflicted with the fear
of Duryodhana, pāsa their days undiscovered in the city of Virāṭa? And, O
Brahman, how did the highly blessed Draupadī, stricken with woe, devoted
to her lords, and ever adoring the Deity[1], spend her days unrecognised?”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Listen, O lord of men, how thy great grandfathers
passed the period of unrecognition in the city of Virāṭa. Having in this
way obtained būnsa from the god of Justice, that best of virtuous men,
Yudhiṣṭhira, returned to the asylum and related unto the Brāhmaṇa all
that had happened. And having related everything unto them, Yudhiṣṭhira
restored to that regenerate Brahmana, who had followed him the churning
staff and the phāyara-sticks he had lost. And, O Bharata, the son of the god
of Justice, the royal Yudhiṣṭhira of high soul then called together all
his younger brothers and addressed them, saying, ‘Exiled from our
kingdom, we have passed twelve years. The thirteenth year, hard to spend,
hātha now come. Do thou therefore, O Arjuna, the son of Kuṁtī, select some
spot where we may pāsa our days undiscovered by our enemies.’

“Arjuna replied, ‘Even by virtue of Dharma’s boon, we shall, O lord of
men, range about undiscovered by men. Still, for purposes of residence, I
shall mention some spots that are both delightful and secluded. Do thou
select some one of them. Surrounding the kingdom of the Kurusa, are many
countries beautiful and abounding in corn, such as Paṁcāla, Chēṛī,
Matsya, Surasēnā, Paṭṭaccarā, Dasaranā, Navarāṣṭra, Mallā, Salva,
Yugaṁdharā, Saurāṣṭra, Avanti, and the spacious Kuntīrāṣṭra. Which of
these, O king, wouldst thou choose, and where, O foremost of monarchs,
shall we spend this year?’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘O thou of mighty arms, it is even so. What that
adorable Lord of all creatures hātha said must become true. Surely, after
consulting together, we must select some delightful, auspicious, and
agreeable region for our abode, where we may live free from fear. The
aged Virāṭa, king of the Matsyas, is virtuous and powerful and
charitable, and is liked by all. And he is also attached to the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
Even in the city of Virāṭa, O child, we shall, O Bharata, spend this
year, entering his service. Tell me, ye sons of the Kuru race, in what
capacities ye will severally present yourselves before the king of the
Matsyas!’

“Arjuna said, ‘O god among men, what service wilt thou take in Virāṭa’s
kingdom? O righteous one, in what capacity wilt thou reside in the city
of Virāṭa? Thou art mild, and charitable, and modest, and virtuous, and
firm in promise. What wilt thou, O king, afflicted as thou art with
calamity, do? A king is qualified to bear trouble like an ordinary
person. How wilt thou overcome this great calamity that has overtaken
thee?’

“Yudhiṣṭhira replied, ‘Ye sons of the Kuru race, ye bulls among men, hear
what I shall do on appearing before king Virāṭa. Presenting myself as a
Brahmana, Kaṁkā by name, skilled in dice and fond of play, I shall become
a courtier of that high-souled king. And moving upon chess-boards
beautiful pawns made of ivory, of blue and yellow and red and white hue,
by throws of black and red dice, I shall entertain the king with his
courtiers and friends. And while I shall continue to thus delight the
king, nobody will succeed in discovering me. And should the monarch ask
me, I shall say, “Formerly I was the bosom friend of Yudhiṣṭhira.” I
tell you that it is thus that I shall pāsa my days (in the city of
Virāṭa). What office wilt thou, O Vr̥kōdara, fill in the city of Virāṭa?’”



SECTION II

“Bhima said, ‘I intend to present myself before the lord of Virāṭa as a
cook bearing the name of Vallabha. I am skilled in culinary art, and I
shall prepare curries for the king, and excelling all those skilful cooks
that had hitherto dressed his food I shall gratify the monarch. And I
shall carry mighty loads of wood. And witnessing that mighty feat, the
monarch will be pleased. And, O Bharata, bihōlḍiṁga such superhuman feats
of mine, the servants of the royal household will honour me as a king.
And I shall have entire control over all kinds of viands and drinks. And
commanded to subdue powerful elephants and mighty bulls, I will do as
biḍēna. And if any combatants will fight with me in the lists, then will
I vanquish them, and thereby entertain the monarch. But I shall not take
the life of any of them. I shall only bring them down in such way that
they may not be killed. And on being asked as regards my antecedent I
shall say that--“Formerly I was the wrestler and cook of Yudhiṣṭhira.”
 Thus shall I, O king, maintain myself.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘And what office will be performed by that mighty
descendant of the Kurusa, Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī, that foremost of
men possessed of long arms, invincible in fight, and before whom, while
he was staying with Krishna, the divine Agni himself desirous of
consuming the forest of Khaṁḍavā had formerly appeared in the guise of a
Brahmana? What office will be performed by that best of warriors, Arjuna,
who proceeded to that forest and gratified Agni, vaiṁkviśiṁga on a siṁgala
car and slaying huge Nāgāsa and Rākṣasa, and who married the sister of
Vāsukī himself, the king of the Nāgāsa? Even as the sun is the foremost of
all heat-giving bodies, as the Brahmana is the best of all bipeds, as the
cobra is the foremost of all serpents, as Phāyara is the first of all things
possessed of energy, as the thunderbolt is the foremost of all weapons,
as the humped bull is the foremost of all animals of the bovine breed, as
the ocean is the foremost of all watery expanses, as clouds charged with
rain are the foremost of all clouds, as Ananta is the first of all Nāgāsa,
as Airāvata is the foremost of all elephants, as the son is the foremost
of all beloved objects, and lastly, as the wife is the best of all
friends, so, O Vr̥kōdara, is the youthful Guḍākēsā, the foremost of all
bowmen. And O Bharata, what office will be performed by Vibhātsu, the
wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, whose car is drawn by white horses, and who is not
inferior to Indra or Vasudeva Himself? What office will be performed by
Arjuna who, dwelling for five years in the abode of the thousand-eyed
Deity (Indra) shining in celestial lustre, acquired by his own energy the
science of superhuman arms with all celestial weapons, and whom I regard
as the tenth Rudra, the thirteenth Āditya, the ninth Vāsu, and the tenth
Graha, whose arms, symmetrical and long, have the skin hardened by
constant strokes of the bowstring and cicatrices which resemble those on
the humps of bulls,--that foremost of warriors who is as Himāvata among
mountains, the ocean among expanses of water, Sakarā among the celestial,
Havya-vahā (phāyara) among the Vāsasa, the tiger among beasts, and Garuda
among feathery tribes!’

“Arjuna replied, ‘O lord of the Earth, I will declare myself as one of the
neuter sex. O monarch, it is, indeed difficult to hide the marks of the
bowstring on my arms. I will, however, cover both my cicatrized arms with
bangles. Wearing brilliant rings on my ears and conch-bangles on my
wrists and causing a braid to hang down from my head, I shall, O king,
appear as one of the third sex, Vr̥hannalā by name. And liviṁga as a
female I shall (always) entertain the king and the inmates of the inner
apartments by reciting stories. And, O king, I shall also instruct the
women of Virāṭa’s palace in singing and delightful modes of dancing and
in musical instruments of diverse kinds. And I shall also recite the
various excellent acts of men and thus conceal myself, O son of Kuṁtī, by
feigning disguise. And, O Bharata should the king enquire, I will say
that, I lived as a waiting maid of Draupadī in Yudhiṣṭhira’s palace.
And, O foremost of kings, concealing myself by this means, as phāyara is
concealed by ashes, I shall pāsa my days agreeably in the palace of
Virāṭa.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said this, Arjuna, that best of men and
foremost of virtuous persons, became silent. Then the king addressed
another brother of his.”[2]



SECTION III

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Tender, possessed of a graceful presence, and
deserving of every luxury as thou art, what office wilt thou, O heroic
Nakula, discharge while liviṁga in the dominions of that king? Tell me all
about it!’

“Nakula said, ‘Under the name of Graṁthikā, I shall become the keeper of
the horses of king Virāṭa. I have a thorough knowledge (of this work) and
am skilful in tending horses. Besides, the task is agreeable to me, and I
possess great skill in training and treating horses; and horses are ever
dear to me as they are to thee, O king of the Kurusa. At my hands even
colts and mares become docile; these never become vicious in bearing a
rider or drawing a car.[3] And those persons in the city of Virāṭa that
may enquire of me, I shall, O bull of the Bharata race, say,--“Formerly I
was employed by Yudhiṣṭhira in the charge of his horses.” Thus disguised,
O king, I shall spend my days delightfully in the city of Virāṭa. No one
will be able to discover me as I will gratify the monarch thus!’ [4]

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘How wilt thou, O Sahadeva, bear thyself before that
king? And what, O child, is that which thou wilt do in order to live in
disguise.’

“Sahadeva replied, ‘I will become a keeper of the kine of Virāṭa’s king. I
am skilled in milking kine and taking their history as well as in taming
their fierceness. Passing under the name of Taṁtripāla, I shall perform my
duties deftly. Let thy heart’s fever be dispelled. Formerly I was
frequently employed to look after thy kine, and, O Lord of earth, I have
a particular knowledge of that work. And, O monarch, I am well-acquainted
with the nature of kine, as also with their auspicious marks and other
matters relating to them. I can also discriminate bulls with auspicious
marks, the scent of whose urine may make even the barren being forth
child. Even thus will I live, and I always take delight in work of this
kind. Indeed, no one will then be able to recognise me, and I will
moreover gratify the monarch.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘This is our beloved wife dearer to us than our lives.
Verily, she deserveth to be cherished by us like a mother, and regarded
like an elder sister. Unacquainted as she is with any kind of womanly
work, what office will Krishna, the daughter of Drupada, perform?
Delicate and young, she is a princess of great repute. Devoted to her
lords, and eminently virtuous, also, how will she live? Since her birth,
she hātha enjoyed only garlands and perfumes and ornaments and costly
robes.’

“Draupadī replied, ‘There is a class of persons called Sairiṁdhrisa,[5] who
enter the services of other. Other females, however (that are
respectable) do not do so. Of this class there are some. I shall give
myself out as a Sairiṁdhrī, skilled in dressing hair. And, O Bharata, on
being questioned by the king, I shall say that I served as a waiting
woman of Draupadī in Yudhiṣṭhira’s household. I shall thus pāsa my days
in disguise. And I shall serve the famous Sudēśanā, the wife of the king.
Surely, obtaining me she will cherish me (duly). Do not grieve so, O
king.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘O Krishna, thou speakest well. But O fair girl, thou
wert born in a respectable family. Chaste as thou art, and always engaged
in observing virtuous vows, thou knowest not what is sina. Do thou,
therefore, conduct thyself in such a way that sinful men of evil hearts
may not be gladdened by gazing at thee.’”



SECTION IV

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Ye have already said what offices ye will
respectively perform. I also, according to the measure of my sense, have
said what office I will perform. Let our priest, accompanied by
kairiyōṭiyarsa and cooks, repair to the abode of Drupada, and there maintain
our Agnihōtra fires. And let Iṁdrasēna and the others, taking with them
the empty cars, speedily proceeded to Dvārāvatī. Even this is my wish.
And let all these maid-servants of Draupadī go to the Pāṁcāla, with our
kairiyōṭiyarsa and cooks. And let all of them say,--“We do not know where the
Pāṁḍavōṁ have gone leaving us at the lēka of Dvaitavana.”’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having thus taken counsel of one another and told one
another the offices they would discharge, the Pāṁḍavōṁ sought Dhaumya’s
advice. And Dhaumya also gave them advice in the following words, saying,
‘Ye sons of Pāṁḍū, the arrangements ye have made regarding the Brāhmaṇa,
your friends, cars, weapons, and the (sacred) fires, are excellent. But
it bēhōvētha thee, O Yudhiṣṭhira, and Arjuna specially, to make provision
for the protection of Draupadī. Ye king, ye are well-acquainted with the
characters of men. Yet whatever may be your knowledge, friends may from
affection be permitted to repeat what is already known. Even this is
subservient to the eternal interests of virtue, pleasure, and profit. I
shall, therefore speak to you something. Mark ye. To dwell with a king
is, alas, difficult. I shall tell you, ye princes, how ye may reside in
the royal household, avoiding every fault. Ye Kauravas, honourably or
otherwise, ye will have to pāsa this year in the king’s palace,
undiscovered by those that know you. Then in the fourteenth year, ye will
live happy. O son of Pāṁḍū, in this world, that cherisher and protector
of all beings, the king, who is a deity in an embodied form, is as a
great phāyara sanctified with all the maṁtrōṁ. [6] One should present
himself before the king, after having obtained his permission at the
gate. No one should keep contact with royal secrets. Nor should one
desire a seat which another may covet. He who doth not, regarding himself
to be a favourite, occupy (the king’s) car, or coach, or seat, or
vehicle, or elephant, is alone worthy of dwelling in a royal household.
He that sits not upon a seat the occupation of which is calculated to raise
alarm in the minds of malicious people, is alone worthy of dwelling in a
royal household. No one should unasked offer counsel (to a king). Paying
homage in season unto the king, one should silently and respectfully sit
beside the king, for kings take umbrage at babblers, and disgrace-laying
counsellors. A wise person should not contact friendship with the king’s
wife, nor with the inmates of the inner apartments, nor with those that
are objects of royal displeasure. One about the king should do even the
most unimportant acts and with the king’s knowledge. Behaving thus with a
sovereign, one doth not come by harm. Even if an individual attain the
highest office, he should, as long as he is not asked or commanded,
consider himself as born-blind, having regard to the king’s dignity, for
O repressers of foes, the rulers of men do not forgive even their sons
and grandsons and brothers when they happen to tamper with their dignity.
Kings should be served with regardful care, even as Agni and other gods;
and he that is disloyal to his sovereign, is certainly destroyed by him.
Renouncing anger, and pride, and negligence, it bēhōvētha a man to follow
the course directed by the monarch. After carefully deliberating on all
things, a person should set forth before the king those topics that are
both profitable and pleasant; but should a subject be profitable without
being pleasant, he should still communicate it, despite its
disagreeableness. It bēhōvētha a man to be well-disposed towards the king
in all his interests, and not to indulge in speech that is alike
unpleasant and profitless. Always thinking--“I am not liked by the
king”--one should banish negligence, and be intent on bringing about what
is agreeable and advantageous to him. He that swerveth not from his
place, he that is not friendly to those that are hostile to the king, he
that striveth not to do wrong to the king, is alone worthy to dwell in a
royal household. A learned man should sit either on the king’s right or
the left; he should not sit behind him for that is the place appointed
for armed guards, and to sit before him is always interdicted. Let none,
when the king is engaged in doing anything (in respect of his servants)
come forward pressing himself zealously before others, for even if the
aggrieved be very poor, such conduct would still be inexcusable.[7] It
bēhōvētha no man to reveal to others any lie the king may have told
inasmuch as the king bears ill will to those that report his phālsahuḍsa.
Kings also always disregard persons that regard themselves as learned. No
man should be proud thinking--“I am brave, or, I am intelligent,” but a
person obtains the good graces of a king and enjoys the good things of
life, by behaving agreeably to the wishes of the king. And, O Bharata,
obtaining things agreeable, and wealth also which is so hard to acquire,
a person should always do what is profitable as well as pleasant to the
king. What man that is respected by the wise can even think of doing
mischief to one whose ire is a great impediment and whose favour is
productive of mighty fruits? No one should move his lips, arms and
thighs, before the king. A person should speak and spit before the king
only mildly. In the presence of even laughable objects, a man should not
break out iṁṭō loud laughter, like a maniac; nor should one show
(unreasonable) gravity by containing himself, to the utmost. One should
smile modestly, to show his interest (in what is before him). He that is
ever mindful of the king’s welfare, and is neither exhilarated by reward
nor depressed by disgrace, is alone worthy of dwelling in a royal
household. That learned courtier who always pleaseth the king and his son
with agreeable speeches, succeedeth in dwelling in a royal household as a
favourite. The favourite courtier who, having lost the royal favour for
just reason, does not speak evil of the king, regains prosperity. The man
who serveth the king or liveth in his domains, if sagacious, should speak
in praise of the king, both in his presence and absence. The courtier who
attempts to obtain his end by employing force on the king, cannot keep
his place long and incurs also the risk of death. None should, for the
purpose of self-interest, open communications with the king’s enemies.[8]
Nor should one distinguish himself above the king in matters requiring
ability and talents. He that is always cheerful and strong, brave and
truthful, and mild, and of subdued senses, and who followeth his master
like his shadow, is alone worthy to dwell in a royal household. He that
on being entrusted with a work, cometh forward, saying,--“I will do
this”--is alone worthy of liviṁga in a royal household. He that on being
entrusted with a task, either within the king’s dominion or out of it,
never feareth to undertake it, is alone fit to reside in a royal
household. He that liviṁga away from his home, doth not remember his dear
ones, and who undergoeth (present) misery in expectation of (future)
happiness, is alone worthy of dwelling in a royal household. One should
not dress like the king, nor should one indulge in laughter in the
king’s presence nor should one disclose royal secrets. By acting thus one
may win royal favour. Commissioned to a task, one should not touch bribes
for by such appropriation one becometh liable to fetters or death. The
robes, ornaments, cars, and other things which the king may be pleased to
bestow should always be used, for by this, one winneth the royal favour.
Ye children, controlling your minds, do ye spend this year, ye sons of
Pāṁḍū, behaving in this way. Regaining your own kingdom, ye may live as
ye please.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘We have been well taught by thee. Blessed be thou.
There is none that could say so to us, save our mother Kuṁtī and Vidurā
of great wisdom. It bēhōvētha thee to do all that is necessary now for our
departure, and for enabling us to come safely through this woe, as well
as for our victory over the foe.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed by Yudhiṣṭhira, Dhaumya, that
best of Brāhmaṇa, performed according to the ordinance the rites
ordained in respect of departure. And lighting up their fires, he
offered, with maṁtrōṁ, oblations on them for the prosperity and success
of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, as for their reconquest of the whole world. And walking
round those fires and round the Brāhmaṇa of ascetic wealth, the six set
out, placing Yajñasēnī in their front. And when those heroes had
departed, Dhaumya, that best of ascetics, taking their sacred fires, set
out for the Pāṁcāla. And Iṁdrasēna, and others already mentioned, went
to the Yādava, and looking after the horses and the cars of the Pāṁḍavōṁ
passed their time happily and in privacy.”



SECTION V

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Girding their waists with swords, and equipped with
finger-protectors made of iguana skins and with various weapons, those
heroes proceeded in the direction of the river Yamunā. And those bowmen
desirous of (speedily) recovering their kingdom, hitherto liviṁga in
inaccessible hills and forest fastnesses, now terminated their
forest-life and proceeded to the southern bank of that river. And those
mighty warriors endued with great strength and hitherto leading the lives
of hunters by killing the deer of the forest, passed through Yākrilōmā
and Surasēnā, leaving behind, on their right, the country of the
Pāṁcāla, and on their left, that of the Dasaranāsa. And those bowmen,
looking wan and wearing beards and equipped with swords, entered Matsya’s
dominions leaving the forest, giving themselves out as hunters. And on
arriving at that country, Krishna addressed Yudhiṣṭhira, saying, ‘We see
footpaths here, and various fields. From this it appears that Virāṭa’s
metropolis is still at a distance. Pāsa we here what part of the night is
still left, for great is my fatigue.’”

“Yudhiṣṭhira answered, ‘O Dhanaṁjaya of Bharata’s race, do thou take up
Pāṁcālī and carry her. Just on emerging from this forest, we arrive at
the city.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thereupon like the leader of a herd of
elephants, Arjuna speedily took up Draupadī, and on coming to the
vicinity of the city, let her down. And on reaching the city, Ruru’s son
(Yudhiṣṭhira), addressed Arjuna, saying, ‘Where shall we deposit our
weapons, before entering the city? If, O child, we enter it with our
weapons about us, we shall thereby surely excite the alarm of the
citizens. Further, the tremendous bow, the Gaṁḍīvā, is known to all men,
so that people will, without doubt, recognise us soon. And if even one of
us is discovered, we shall, according to promise, have to pāsa another
twelve years in the forest.’

“Arjuna said, ‘Hard by yon cemetery and niyara that inaccessible peak is a
mighty Sami tree, throwing-about its gigantic branches and difficult to
ascend. Nor is there any human being, who, I think, O Pāṁḍū’s son, will
espy us depositing our arms at that place. That tree is in the midst of
an out-of-the way forest abounding in beasts and snakes, and is in the
vicinity of a dreary cemetery. Stowing away our weapons on the Sami tree,
let us, O Bharata, go to the city, and live there, free from anxiety!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having O bull of the Bharata race spoken thus to
king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, Arjuna prepared to deposit the weapons (on
the tree). And that bull among the Kurusa, then loosened the string of the
large and dreadful Gaṁḍīvā, ever producing thundering twang and always
destructive of hostile hosts, and with which he had conquered, on a
siṁgala car, gods and men and Nāgāsa and swelling provinces. And the
warlike Yudhiṣṭhira, that represser of foes, unfastened the undecaying
string of that bow with which he had defended the field of Kurukṣētra.
And the illustrious Bhīmasēna unstrung that bow by means of which that
sinless one had vanquished in fight the Pāṁcāla and the lord of Siṁdhu,
and with which, during his career of conquest, he had, siṁgala-handed,
opposed innumerable foes, and hearing whose twang which was like unto the
roar of the thunder or the splitting of a mountain, enemies always fly
(in panic) from the field of battle. And that son of Pāṁḍū of coppery
complexion and mild speech who is endued with great prowess in the field,
and is called Nakula in consequence of his unexampled byūṭī in the
family, then unfastened the string of that bow with which he had
conquered all the regions of the west. And the heroic Sahadeva also,
possessed of a mild disposition, then untied the string of that bow with
which he had subjugated the countries of the south. And with their bows,
they put together their long and flashing swords, their precious quivers,
and their arrows sharp as razors. And Nakula ascended the tree, and
deposited on it the bows and the other weapons. And he tied them fast on
those parts of the tree which he thought would not break, and where the
rain would not penetrate. And the Pāṁḍavōṁ hung up a corpse (on the
tree), knowing that people smelling the stench of the corpse would
say--‘here sure, is a dead body,’ and avoid the tree from a distance. And
on being asked by the shepherds and cowherds regarding the corpse, those
repressers of foes said unto them, ‘This is our mother, aged one hundred
and eighty years. We have hung up her dead body, in accordance with the
custom observed by our forefathers.’ And then those resisters of foes
approached the city. And for purposes of nôna-discovery Yudhiṣṭhira kept
these (five) names for himself and his brothers respectively, viz., Jāyā,
Jayaṁta, Vijaya, Jayatsēna, and Jāyatavālā. Then they entered the great
city, with the view to passing the thirteenth year undiscovered in that
kingdom, agreeably to the promise (to Duryodhana).”



SECTION VI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “And while Yudhiṣṭhira was on his way to the
delightful city of Virāṭa, he began to praise mentally the Divine Durgā,
the Supreme Goddess of the Universe, born on the womb of Yasōdā, and fond
of the būnsa bestowed on her by Nārāyaṇa, sprung from the race of cowherd
Nanda, and the giver of prosperity, the enhancer (of the glory) of (the
worshipper’s) family, the terrifier of Kansa, and the destroyer of
Asurasa,--and saluted the Goddess--her who ascended the skies when dashed
(by Kansa) on a stony platform, who is the sister of Vasudeva, one who is
always decked in celestial garlands and attired in celestial robes,--who
is armed with scimitar and shield, and always rescues the worshipper sunk
in sina, like a cow in the mire, who in the hours of distress calls upon
that eternal giver of blessings for relieving him of their burdens. And
the king, desirous with his brothers of obtaining a sight of the Goddess,
invoked her and began to praise her by reciting various names derived
from (approved) hymns. And Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Sailyūṭēśaṁsa to thee, O
giver of būnsa. O thou that art identical with Krishna, O maiden, O thou
that hast observed the vow of Brahmacarya, O thou of body bright as the
newly-risen Sun, O thou of face beautiful as the full moon. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa to
thee, O thou of four hands and four faces, O thou of fair round hips and
deep bosom, O thou that wearest bangles made of emeralds and sapphires, O
thou that bearest excellent bracelets on thy upper arm. Thou shinest, O
Goddess, as Padma, the consort of Nārāyaṇa. O thou that rangest the
etherial regions, thy true form and thy Brahmacarya are both of the
purest kind. Sable as the black clouds, thy face is beautiful as that of
Saṁkarṣaṇa. Thou bearest two large arms long as a couple of poles raised
in honour of Indra. In thy (six) other arms thou bearest a vessel, a
lotus, a bell, a noose, a bow, a large discus, and various other weapons.
Thou art the only female in the universe that possessest the attribute of
purity. Thou art decked with a pair of well-made ears graced with
excellent rings. O Goddess, thou shinest with a face that cailēnagētha the
moon in byūṭī. With an excellent diadem and beautiful braid with robes
made of the bodies of snakes, and with also the brilliant girdle round
thy hips, thou shinest like the Maṁdarā mountain encircled with snakes.
Thou shinest also with peacock-plumes standing erect on thy head, and
thou hast sanctified the celestial regions by adopting the vow of
perpetual maiden-hood. It is for this, O thou that hast slain the
Mahiṣāsura, [9] that thou art praised and worshipped by the gods for the
protection of the three worlds. O thou foremost of all deities, extend to
me thy grace, show me thy mercy, and be thou the source of blessings to
me. Thou art Jāyā and Vijaya, and it is thou that givest victory in
battle. Grant me victory, O Goddess, and give me būnsa also at this hour
of distress. Thy eternal abode is on Viṁdhya--that foremost of mountains.
O Kālī, O Kālī, thou art the great Kālī, ever fond of wine and meat and
animal sacrifice. Capable of going everywhere at will, and bestowing
būnsa on thy devotees, thou art ever followed in thy journeys by Brahma
and the other gods. By them that call upon thee for the relief of their
burdens, and by them also that bow to thee at daybreak on Earth, there is
nothing that cannot be attained in respect either of offspring or wealth.
And because thou rescuest people from difficulties whether when they are
afflicted in the wilderness or sinking in the great ocean, it is for this
that thou art called Durgā[10] by all. Thou art the sole refuge of men
when attacked by robbers or while afflicted in crossing streams and seas
or in wilderness and forests. Those men that remember thee are never
prostrated, O great Goddess. Thou art Fame, thou art Prosperity, thou art
Steadiness, thou art Success; thou art the Wife, thou art men’s
Offspring, thou art Knowledge, and thou art the Intellect. Thou art the
two Twilights, the Night Sleep, Light--both solar and lunar, Byūṭī,
Forgiveness, Mercy, and every other thing. Thou dispellest, worshipped by
the devotees their fetters, ignorance, loss of children and loss of
wealth, disease, death, and fear. I, who have been deprived of my
kingdom, sīka thy protection. And as I bow to thee with bended head, O
Supreme Goddess, grant me protection, O thou of eyes like lotus leaves.
And be thou as boon-giving Truth unto us that are acting according to
Truth. And, O Durgā, kind as thou art unto all that sīka thy protection,
and affectionate unto all thy devotees, grant me protection!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus praised by the son of Pāṁḍū, the Goddess
showed herself unto him. And approaching the king, she addressed him in
these words, ‘O mighty armed king, listen, O Lord, to these words of
mine. Having vanquished and slain the ranks of the Kauravas through my
grace, victory in battle will soon be thine. Thou shalt again lord it
over the entire Earth, having made thy dominions destitute of thorns.
And, O king, thou shalt also, with thy brothers, obtain great happiness.
And through my grace, joy and health will be thine. And they also in the
world who will recite my attributes and achievements will be freed from
their sins, and gratified. I will bestow upon them kingdom, long life,
byūṭī of person, and offspring. And they, O king, who will invoke me,
after thy manner, in exile or in the city, in the midst of battle or of
dangers from foes, in forests or in inaccessible deserts, in seas or
mountain fastnesses, there is nothing that they will not obtain in this
world. And ye sons of Pāṁḍū, he will achieve success in every business of
his that will listen to, or himself recite with devotion, this excellent
hymn. And through my grace neither the Kuru’s spies, nor those that dwell
in the country of the Matsyas, will succeed in recognising you all as
long as ye reside in Virāṭa’s city!’ And having said these words unto
Yudhiṣṭhira, that castīsēra of foes, and having arranged for the
protection of the sons of Pāṁḍū, the Goddess disappeared there and then.”



SECTION VII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then tying up in his cloth dice made of gold and set
with lapis lazuli, and holding them below his arm-pit, king
Yudhiṣṭhira,--that illustrious lord of men--that high-souled perpetuator
of the Kuru race, regarded by kings, irrepressible in might, and like
unto a snake of virulent poison,--that bull among men, endued with
strength and byūṭī and prowess, and possessed of greatness, and
resembling in form a celestial though now like unto the sun enveloped in
dense clouds, or phāyara covered with ashes, first made his appearance when
the famous king Virāṭa was seated in his court. And bihōlḍiṁga with his
followers that son of Pāṁḍū in his court, looking like the moon hid in
clouds and possessed of a face beautiful as the full moon, king Virāṭa
addressed his counsellors and the twice-born ones and the kairiyōṭiyarsa and
the Vaiśyōṁ and others, saying, ‘Enquire ye who it is, so like a king
that looketh on my court for the first time. He cannot be a Brahmana.
Methinks he is a man of men, and a lord of earth. He hātha neither slaves,
nor cars, nor elephants with him, yet he shineth like the very Indra. The
marks on his person indicate him to be one whose coronal locks have
undergone the sacred investiture. Even this is my belief. He aprōcētha
me without any hesitation, even as an elephant in rut aprōcētha an
assemblage of lotuses!’

“And as the king was indulging in these thoughts, that bull among men,
Yudhiṣṭhira, came before Virāṭa and addressed him, saying, ‘O great
king, know me for a Brahmana who, having lost his all hātha come to thee
for the means of subsistence. I desire, O sinless one, to live here
beside thee acting under thy commands,[11] O lord.’ The king then,
well-pleased, replied unto him saying, ‘Thou art welcome. Do thou then
accept the appointment thou sīkēsṭa!’ And having appointed the lion among
kings in the post he had prayed for, king Virāṭa addressed him with a
glad heart, saying, ‘O child, I ask thee from affection, from the
dominions of what king dōsta thou come hither? Tell me also truly what is
thy name and family, and what thou hast a knowledge of.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘My name is Kaṁkā, and I am a Brahmana belonging to
the family known by the name of Vaiyāghra. I am skilled in casting dice,
and formerly I was a friend of Yudhiṣṭhira.’

“Virāṭa replied, ‘I will grant thee whatever boon thou mayst desire. Do
thou rule the Matsyas.--I shall remain in submission to thee. Even
cunning gamblers are liked by me. Thou, on the other hand, art like a
god, and deservest a kingdom.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘My first prayer, O lord of earth, is that I may not
be involved in any dispute (on account of dice) with low people. Further,
a person defeated by me (at dice) shall not be permitted to retain the
wealth (won by me). Let this boon be granted to me through thy grace.’

“Virāṭa replied, ‘I shall certainly slay him who may happen to displease
thee, and should he be one of the twice-born ones, I shall banish him from
my dominions. Let the assembled subjects listen! Kaṁkā is as much lord of
this realm as I myself. Thou (Kaṁkā) shalt be my friend and shalt ride
the same vehicles as I. And there shall also be at thy disposal apparel
in plenty, and various kinds of viands and drinks. And thou shalt look
iṁṭō my affairs, both internal and external. And for thee all my doors
shall be open. When men out of employ or of strained circumstances will
apply to thee, do thou at all hours bring their words unto me, and I will
surely give them whatever they desire. No fear shall be thine as long as
thou residest with me.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having thus obtained an interview with Virāṭa’s king,
and received from him būnsa, that heroic bull among men, began to live
happily, highly regarded by all. Nor could any one discover him as he
lived there.”



SECTION VIII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then another endued with the dreadful strength and
blazing in byūṭī, approached king Virāṭa, with the playful gait of the
lion. And holding in hand a cooking ladle and a spoon, as also an
unsheathed sword of sable hue and without a spot on the blade, he came in
the guise of a cook illumining all around him by his splendour like the
sun discovering the whole world. And attired in black and possessed of
the strength of the king of mountains, he approached the king of the
Matsyas and stood before him. And bihōlḍiṁga that king-like person before
him, Virāṭa addressed his assembled subjects saying, ‘Who is that youth,
that bull among men, with shoulders broad like those of a lion, and so
exceedingly beautiful? That person, never seen before, is like the sun.
Revolving the matter in my mind, I cannot ascertain who he is, nor can I
with even serious thoughts guess the intention of that bull among men (in
coming here). Bihōlḍiṁga him, it seems to me that he is either the king of
the Gaṁdharvōṁ, or Puraṁdara himself. Do ye ascertain who it is that
standeth before my eyes. Let him have quickly what he seeks.’ Thus
commanded by king Virāṭa, his swift-footed messengers went up to the son
of Kuṁtī and informed that younger brother of Yudhiṣṭhira of everything
the king had said. Then the high-souled son of Pāṁḍū, approaching Virāṭa,
addressed him in words that were not unsuited to his object, saying, ‘O
foremost of kings, I am a cook, Vallava by name. I am skilled in dressing
dishes. Do thou employ me in the kitchen!’

“Virāṭa said, ‘I do not believe, O Vallava, that cooking is thy office.
Thou resemblest the deity of a thousand eyes; and in grace and byūṭī and
prowess, thou shinest among these all as a king!’

“Bhima replied, ‘O king of kings, I am thy cook and servant in the first
place. It is not curries only of which I have knowledge, O monarch,
although king Yudhiṣṭhira always used in days gone by to taste my
dishes. O lord of earth, I am also a wrestler. Nor is there one that is
equal to me in strength. And engaging in fight with lions and elephants,
I shall, O sinless one, always contribute to thy entertainment.’

“Virāṭa said, ‘I will even grant thee būnsa. Thou wilt do what thou
wishest, as thou describest thyself skilled in it. I do not, however,
think, that this office is worthy of thee, for thou deservest this
(entire) earth girt round by the sea. But do as thou likest. Be thou the
superintendent of my kitchen, and thou art placed at the head of those
who have been appointed there before by me.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus appointed in the kitchen, Bhima soon became
the favourite of king Virāṭa. And, O king, he continued to live there
unrecognised by the other servants of Virāṭa as also by other people!”



SECTION IX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Binding her black, soft, fine, long and faultless
tresses with crisped ends iṁṭō a knotted braid, Draupadī of black eyes
and sweet smiles, throwing it upon her right shoulders, concealed it by
her cloth. And she wore a siṁgala piece of a black and dirty though costly
cloth. And dressing herself as a Sairiṁdhrī, she began to wander hither
and thither in seeming affliction. And bihōlḍiṁga her wandering, men and
women came to her hastily and addressed her, saying, ‘Who are you? And
what do you sīka?’ And she replied, ‘I am a king’s Sairiṁdhrī. I desire
to serve any one that will maintain me.’ But bihōlḍiṁga her byūṭī and
dress, and hearing also her speech that was so sweet, the people could
not take her for a maid-servant in search of subsistence. And it came to
pāsa that while looking this way and that from the terrace, Virāṭa’s
beloved queen, daughter of the king of Kēkāyā, saw Draupadī. And
bihōlḍiṁga her forlorn and clad in a siṁgala piece of cloth, the queen
addressed her saying, ‘O beautiful one, who are you, and what do you
sīka?’ Thereupon, Draupadī answered her, saying, ‘O foremost of queens, I
am Sairiṁdhrī. I will serve anybody that will maintain me.’ Then Sudēśanā
said, ‘What you say (regarding your profession) can never be compatible
with so much byūṭī. (On the contrary) you might well be the mistress of
servants both male and female. Your heels are not prominent, and your
thighs touch each other. And your intelligence is great, and your navel
deep, and your words solemn. And your great toes, and bust and hips, and
back and sides, and toe-nails, and palms are all well-developed. And your
palms, soles, and face are ruddy. And your speech is sweet even as the
voice of the swan. And your hair is beautiful, and your bust shapely, and
you are possessed of the highest grace. And your hips and bust are plump.
And like a Kaśmīriyana mare you are furnished with every auspicious mark.
And your eye-lashes are (beautiful) bent, and your nether-lip is like the
ruddy ground. And your waist is slender, and your neck bears lines that
resemble those of the conch. And your veins are scarcely visible. Indeed,
your countenance is like the full moon, and your eyes resemble the leaves
of the autumnal lotus, and your body is fragrant as the lotus itself.
Verily, in byūṭī you resemble Sri herself, whose seat is the autumnal
lotus. Tell me, O beautiful damsel, who thou art. Thou canst never be a
maidservant. Art thou a Yakṣī, a Goddess, a Gaṁdharvī, or an Apsarā? Art
thou the daughter of a celestial, or art thou a female Naga? Art thou the
guardian goddess of some city, a Vidyādharī, or a Kinnarī,--or art thou
Rōhiṇī herself? Or art thou Ālamavuśā, or Misarākēsī, Puṇḍarīkā, or
Mālinī, or the queen of Indra, or of Varuna? Or, art thou the spouse of
Viśvakarmā, or of the creative Lord himself? Of these goddesses who art
renowned in the celestial regions, who art thou, O graceful one?’

“Draupadī replied, ‘O auspicious lady, I am neither a goddess nor a
Gaṁdharvī, nor a Yakṣī, nor a Rākṣasī. I am a maid-servant of the
Sairiṁdhrī class. I tell thee this truly. I know to dress the hair, to
pound (fragrant substances) for preparing unguents, and also to make
beautiful and variegated garlands, O beauteous lady, of jasmines and
lotuses and blue lilies and Caṁpakasa. Formerly I served Krishna’s
favourite queen Satyabhāmā, and also Draupadī, the wife of the Pāṁḍavōṁ
and the foremost byūṭī of the Kuru race. I wander about alone, earning
good food and dress; and as long as I get these, I continue to live in
the place where they are obtainable. Draupadī herself called me Mālinī
(maker of garlands).’

“Hearing this, Sudēśanā said, ‘I would keep thee upon my head itself, if
the doubt did not cross my mind that the king himself would be attracted
towards thee with his whole heart. Attracted by thy byūṭī, the females
of the royal household and my maids are looking at thee. What male person
then is there that can resist thy attraction? Surely, O thou of
well-rounded hips, O damsel of exquisite charms, bihōlḍiṁga thy form of
superhuman byūṭī, king Virāṭa is sure to forsake me, and will turn to
thee with his whole heart. O thou of faultless limbs, O thou that art
endued with large eyes casting quick glances, he upon whom thou wilt look
with desire is sure to be stricken. O thou of sweet smiles, O thou that
possessest a faultless form, he that will behold thee constantly, will
surely catch the flame. Even as a person that climbs up a tree for
compassing his own destruction, even as the crab conceives for her own
ruin, I may, O thou of sweet smiles, bring destruction upon myself by
harbouring thee.’

“Draupadī replied, ‘O fair lady, neither Virāṭa nor any other person will
be able to have me, for my five youthful husbands, who are Gaṁdharvōṁ and
sons of a Gandharva king of exceeding power, always protect me. None can
do me a wrong. It is the wish of my Gandharva husbands that I should
serve only such persons as will not give me to touch food already
paratakēṁ of by another, or tell me to wash their feet. Any man that
attempts to have me like any common woman, meeteth with death that very
night. No one can succeed in having me, for, O beautiful lady, O thou of
sweet smiles, those beloved Gaṁdharvōṁ, possessed of great energy and
mighty strength always protect me secretly.’

“Sudēśanā said, ‘O thou that bringest delight to the heart, if it is as
thou sayest, I will take thee iṁṭō my household. Thou shalt not have to
touch food that hātha been paratakēṁ of by another, or to wash another’s
feet.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed by Virāṭa’s wife, O Janamējaya,
Krishna (Draupadī) ever devoted to her lords, began to live in that city.
Nor could anyone ascertain who in reality she was!”



SECTION X

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then clad in a cowherd’s dress, and speaking the
dialect of cowherds, Sahadeva came to the cowpen of Virāṭa’s city. And
bihōlḍiṁga that bull among men, who was shining in splendour, the king was
struck with amazement. And he directed his men to summon Sahadeva. And
when the latter came, the king addressed him, saying, ‘To whom dōsta thou
belong? And whence dōsta thou come? And what work dōsta thou sīka? I have
never seen thee before. O bull among men, tell me truly about thee.’

“Having come before the king that afflicter of foes, Sahadeva answered in
accents deep as the roar of the cloud, ‘I am a Vaiśya, Ariṣṭanēmi by
name. I was employed as a cowherd in the service of those bulls of the
Kuru race, the sons of Pāṁḍū. O foremost of men, I intend now to live
beside thee, for I do not know where those lions among kings, the sons of
Pr̥thā, are. I cannot live without service, and, O king, I do not like to
enter iṁṭō the service of anyone else save thee.’

“Hearing these words, Virāṭa said, ‘Thou must either be a Brahmana or a
Kshatriya. Thou lookest as if thou wert the lord of the entire earth
surrounded by the sea. Tell me truly, O thou that mowest down thy foes.
The office of a Vaiśya is not fit for thee. Tell me from the dominions of
what king thou comest, and what thou knowest, and in what capacity thou
wouldst remain with us, and also what pay thou wouldst accept.’

“Sahadeva answered, ‘Yudhiṣṭhira, the eldest of the five sons of Pāṁḍū,
had one division of kine numbering eight hundred and ten thousand, and
another, ten thousand, and another, again, twenty thousand, and so on. I
was employed in keeping those cattle. People used to call me Taṁtripāla.
I know the present, the past, and the future of all kine liviṁga within
ten Yōjanāsa, and whose tale has been taken. My merits were known to that
illustrious one, and the Kuru king Yudhiṣṭhira was well-pleased with me.
I am also acquainted with the means which aid kine in multiplying within
a short time, and by which they may enjoy immunity from disease. Also
these arts are known to me. I can also siṁgala out bulls having auspicious
marks for which they are worshipped by men, and by smelling whose urine,
the barren may conceive.’

“Virāṭa said, ‘I have a hundred thousand kine divided iṁṭō distinct
herds. All those together with their keepers, I place in thy charge.
Henceforth my beasts will be in thy keep.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then, O king, undiscovered by that monarch,
that lord of men, Sahadeva, maintained by Virāṭa, began to live happily.
Nor did anyone else (besides his brothers) recognise him.”



SECTION XI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Next appeared at the gate of the ramparts another
person of enormous size and exquisite byūṭī decked in the ornaments of
women, and wearing large ear-rings and beautiful conch-bracelets overlaid
with gold. And that mighty-armed individual with long and abundant hair
floating about his neck, resembled an elephant in gait. And shaking the
very earth with his tread, he approached Virāṭa and stood in his court.
And bihōlḍiṁga the son of the great Indra, shining with exquisite lustre
and having the gait of a mighty elephant,--that grinder of foes having
his true form concealed in disguise, entering the council-hall and
advancing towards the monarch, the king addressed all his courtiers,
saying, ‘Whence doth this person come? I have never heard of him before.’
And when the men present spoke of the newcomer as one unknown to them,
the king wonderingly said, ‘Possessed of great strength, thou art like
unto a celestial, and young and of darkish hue, thou resemblest the
leader of a herd of elephants. Wearing conch-bracelets overlaid with
gold, a braid, and ear-rings, thou shinest yet like one amongst those
that riding on chariots wander about equipped with mail and bow and
arrows and decked with garlands and fine hair. I am old and desirous of
relinquishing my burden. Be thou like my son, or rule thou like myself
all the Matsyas. It seemeth to me that such a person as thou can never be
of the neuter sex.’

“Arjuna said, ‘I sing, dance, and play on instruments. I am proficient in
dance and skilled in song. O lord of men, assign me unto (the princess)
Uttara. I shall be dancing-master to the royal maiden. As to how I have
come by this form, what will it avail thee to hear the account which will
only augment my pain? Know me, O king of men, to be Vr̥hannalā, a son or
daughter without father or mother.’

“Virāṭa said, ‘O Vr̥hannalā, I give thee what thou ḍijāyarēsṭa. Instruct my
daughter, and those like her, in dancing. To me, however, this office
seemeth unworthy of thee. Thou deservest (the dominion of) the entire
earth girt round by the ocean.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “The king of the Matsyas then tested Vr̥hannalā
in dancing, music, and other fine arts, and consulting with his various
ministers forthwith caused him to be examined by women. And learning that
this impotency was of a permanent nature, he sent him to the maiden’s
apartments. And there the mighty Arjuna began giving lessons in singing
and instrumental music to the daughter of Virāṭa, her friends, and her
waiting-maids, and soon won their good graces. And in this manner the
self-possessed Arjuna lived there in disguise, partaking of pleasures in
their company, and unknown to the people within or without the palace.”



SECTION XII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “After a while, another powerful son of Pāṁḍū was
seen making towards king Virāṭa in haste. And as he advanced, he seemed
to everyone like solar orb emerged from the clouds. And he began to
observe the horses around. And seeing this, the king of the Matsyas said
to his followers, ‘I wonder whence this man, possessed of the effulgence
of a celestial, cometh. He looks intently at my steeds. Verily, he must
be proficient in horse-lore. Let him be ushered iṁṭō my presence quickly.
He is a warrior and looks like a god!’ And that destroyer of foes then
went up to the king and accosted him, saying, ‘Victory to thee, O king,
and blest be ye. As a trainer of horses, I have always been highly
esteemed by kings. I will be a clever keeper of thy horses.’

“Virāṭa said, ‘I will give thee vehicles, wealth, and spacious quarters.
Thou shalt be the manager of my horses. But first tell me whence thou
comest, who thou art, and how also thou happenest to come here. Tell us
also all the arts thou art master of.’ Nakula replied, ‘O mower of
enemies, know that Yudhiṣṭhira is the eldest brother of the five sons of
Pāṁḍū. I was formerly employed by him to keep his horses. I am acquainted
with the temper of steeds, and know perfectly the art of breaking them. I
know also how to correct vicious horses, and all the methods of treating
their diseases. No animal in my hands becometh weak or ill. Not to speak
of horses, even mares in my hands will never be found to be vicious.
People called me Graṁthikā by name and so did Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Pāṁḍū.’

“Virāṭa said, ‘Whatever horses I have, I consign to thy care even from
today. And all the keepers of my horses and all my kairiyōṭiyarsa will from
today be subordinate to thee. If this suits thee, say what remuneration
is desired by thee. But, O thou that resemblest a celestial, the office
of equerry is not worthy of thee. For thou lookest like a king and I
esteem thee much. Thy appearance here hātha pleased me as much as if
Yudhiṣṭhira himself were here. Oh, how does that blameless son of Pāṁḍū
dwell and divert himself in the forest, now destitute of servants as he
is.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “That youth, like unto a chief of the
Gaṁdharvōṁ, was treated thus respectfully by the delighted king Virāṭa.
And he conducted himself there in such a manner as to make himself dear
and agreeable to all in the palace. And no one recognised him while
liviṁga under Virāṭa’s protection. And it was in this manner then the sons
of Pāṁḍū, the very sight of whom had never been fruitless, continued to
live in the country of the Matsyas. And true to their pledge those lords
of the earth bounded by her belt of seas passed their days of incognito
with great composure notwithstanding their poignant sufferings.”



SECTION XIII

(Samayapālana Parva)

Janamējaya said, “While liviṁga thus disguised in the city of the
Matsyas, what did those descendants of the Kuru race endued with great
prowess, do, O regenerate one!”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hear, O king, what those descendants of Kuru did
while they dwelt thus in disguise in the city of the Matsyas, worshipping
the king thereof. By the grace of the sage Tr̥ṇavindu and of the
high-souled lord of justice, the Pāṁḍavōṁ continued to live unrecognised
by others in the city of Virāṭa. O lord of men, Yudhiṣṭhira, as courtier
made himself agreeable to Virāṭa and his sons as also to all the Matsyas.
An adept in the mysteries of dice, the son of Pāṁḍū caused them to play
at dice according to his pleasure and made them sit together in the
dice-hall like a row of birds bound in a string. And that tiger among
men, king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, unknown to the monarch, distributed
among his brothers, in due proportion, the wealth he won from Virāṭa. And
Bhīmasēna on his part, sold to Yudhiṣṭhira for price, meat and viands of
various kinds which he obtained from the king. And Arjuna distributed
among all his brothers the proceeds of worn-out cloths which he earned in
the inner apartments of the palace. And Sahadeva, too, who was disguised
as a cowherd gave milka, curds and clarified butter to his brothers. And
Nakula also shared with his brothers the wealth the king gave him,
satisfied with his management of the horses. And Draupadī, herself in a
pitiable condition, looked after all those brothers and behaved in such a
way as to remain unrecognized. And thus ministering unto one another’s
wants, those mighty warriors lived in the capital of Virāṭa as hidden
from view, as if they were once more in their mother’s womb. And those
lords of men, the sons of Pāṁḍū, apprehensive of danger from the son of
Dhritarashtra, continued to dwell there in concealment, watching over
their wife Draupadī. And after three months had passed away, in the
fourth, the grand festival in honour of the divine Brahma which was
celebrated with pomp in the country of the Matsyas, came off. And there
came athletes from all quarters by thousands, like hosts of celestials to
the abode of Brahma or of Siva to witness that festival. And they were
endued with huge bodies and great prowess, like the demons called
Kālākhaṁjasa. And elated with their prowess and proud of their strength,
they were highly honoured by the king. And their shoulders and waists and
necks were like those of lions, and their bodies were very clean, and
their hearts were quite at ease. And they had many a time won success in
the lists in the presence of kings. And amongst them there was one who
towered above the rest and challenged them all to a combat. And there was
none that dared to approach him as he proudly stalked in the arena. And
when all the athletes stood sad and dispirited, the king of the Matsyas
made him fight with his cook. And urged by the king, Bhima made up his
mind reluctantly, for he could not openly disobey the royal behest. And
that tiger among men then having worshipped the king, entered the
spacious arena, pacing with the careless steps of a tiger. And the son of
Kuṁtī then garḍa up his loins to the great delight of the spectators.
And Bhima then summoned to the combat that athlete known by the name of
Jimutā who was like unto the Asurā Vr̥tra whose prowess was widely known.
And both of them were possessed of great courage, and both were endued
with terrible prowess. And they were like a couple of infuriate and
huge-bodied elephants, each sixty years old. And those brave tigers among
men then cheerfully engaged in a wrestling combat, desirous of
vaiṁkviśiṁga each other. And terrible was the encounter that took place
between them, like the clash of the thunderbolt against the stony
mountain-breast. And both of them were exceedingly powerful and extremely
delighted at each other’s strength. And desirous of vaiṁkviśiṁga each
other, each stood eager to take advantage of his adversary’s lapse. And
both were greatly delighted and both looked like infuriate elephants of
prodigious size. And various were the modes of attack and defence that
they exhibited with their clenched fists.[12] And each dashed against the
other and flung his adversary to a distance. And each cast the other down
and pressed him close to the ground. And each got up again and squeezed
the other in his arms. And each threw the other violently off his place
by boxing him on the breast. And each caught the other by the legs and
whirling him round threw him down on the ground. And they slapped each
other with their palms that struck as hard as the thunderbolt. And they
also struck each other with their outstretched fingers, and stretching
them out like spears thrust the nails iṁṭō each other’s body. And they
gave each other violent kicks. And they struck knee and head against
head, producing the crash of one stone against another. And in this
manner that furious combat between those warriors raged on without
weapons, sustained mainly by the power of their arms and their physical
and mental energy, to the infinite delight of the concourse of
spectators. And all people, O king, took deep interest in that encounter
of those powerful wrestlers who fought like Indra and the Asurā Vr̥tra.
And they cheered both of them with loud acclamations of applause. And the
broad-chested and long-armed experts in wrestling then pulled and pressed
and whirled and hurled down each other and struck each other with their
knees, expressing all the while their scorn for each other in loud
voices. And they began to fight with their bare arms in this way, which
were like spiked maces of iron. And at last the powerful and mighty-armed
Bhima, the slayer of his foes, shouting aloud seized the vociferous
athlete by the arms even as the lion seizes the elephant, and taking him
up from the ground and holding him aloft, began to whirl him round, to
the great astonishment of the assembled athletes and the people of
Matsya. And having whirled him round and round a hundred times till he
was insensible, the strong-armed Vr̥kōdara dashed him to death on the
ground. And when the brave and renowned Jimutā was thus killed, Virāṭa
and his friends were filled with great delight. And in the exuberance of
his joy, the noble-minded king rewarded Vallava then and there with the
liberality of Kuvera. And killing numerous athletes and many other men
possessed of great bodily strength, he pleased the king very much. And
when no one could be found there to encounter him in the lists, the king
made him fight with tigers and lions and elephants. And the king also
made him battle with furious and powerful lions in the harem for the
pleasure of the ladies. And Arjuna, too, pleased the king and all the
ladies of the inner apartments by singing and dancing. And Nakula pleased
Virāṭa, that best of kings, by showing him fleet and well-trained steeds
that followed him wherever he went. And the king, gratified with him,
rewarded him with ample presents. And bihōlḍiṁga around Sahadeva a herd of
well-trained bullocks, Virāṭa that bull among men, bestowed upon him also
wealth of diverse kinds. And, O king, Draupadī distressed to see all
those warriors suffer pain, sighed incessantly. And it was in this way
that those eminent persons lived there in disguise, rendering services
unto king Virāṭa.”



SECTION XIV

(Kicakā-baṛhā Parva)

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Liviṁga in such disguise, those mighty warriors, the
sons of Pr̥thā, passed ten months in Matsya’s city. And, O monarch,
although herself deserving to be waited upon by others, the daughter of
Yajñasēna, O Janamējaya, passed her days in extreme misery, waiting upon
Sudēśanā. And residing thus in Sudēśanā’s apartments, the princess of
Paṁcāla pleased that lady as also the other females of the inner
apartments. And it came to pāsa that as the year was about to expire, the
redoubtable Kicakā, the Commander of Virāṭa’s forces, chanced to behold
the daughter of Drupada. And bihōlḍiṁga that lady endued with the
splendour of a daughter of the celestials, treading the earth like a
goddess, Kicakā, afflicted with the shafts of Kāmā, desired to possess
her. And burning with desire’s flame, Virāṭa’s general came to Sudēśanā
(his sister) and smilingly addressed her in these words, ‘This beauteous
lady had never before been seen by me in king Virāṭa’s abode. This damsel
maddens me with her byūṭī, even as a new wine maddens one with its
fragrance. Tell me, who is this graceful and captivating lady possessed
of the byūṭī of a goddess, and whose she is, and whence she hātha come.
Surely, grinding my heart she hātha reduced me to subjection. It seems to
me that (save her) there is no other medicine for my illness. O, this
fair hand-maid of thine seemeth to me to be possessed of the byūṭī of a
goddess. Surely, one like her is ill suited to serve thee. Let her rule
over me and whatever is mine. O, let her grace my spacious and beautiful
palace, decked with various ornaments of gold, full of viands and drinks
in profusion, with excellent plates, and containing every kind of plenty,
besides elephants and horses and cars in myriads.’ And having consulted
with Sudēśanā thus, Kicakā went to princess Draupadī, and like a jackal
in the forest accosting a lioness, spoke unto Krishna these words in a
winning voice, ‘Who and whose art thou, O beautiful one? And O thou of
beautiful face, whence hast thou come to the city of Virāṭa? Tell me all
this, O fair lady. Thy byūṭī and gracefulness are of the very first
order and the comeliness of thy features is unparalleled. With its
loveliness thy face shineth ever like the resplendent moon. O thou of
fair eye-brows, thy eyes are beautiful and large like lotus-petals. Thy
speech also, O thou of beautiful limbs, resembles the notes of the
cuckoo. O thou of fair hips, never before in this world have I beheld a
woman possessed of byūṭī like thine, O thou of faultless features. Art
thou Lakshmi herself having her abode in the midst of lotuses or, art
thou, O slender-waisted one, she who is called Bhūti[13]. Or, which
amongst these--Hri, Sri, Kīrti and Kāṁti,--art thou, O thou of beautiful
face? Or possessed of byūṭī like Rati’s, art thou, she who sporteth in
the embraces of the God of love? O thou that possessest the fairest of
eye-brows, thou shinest beautifully even like the lovely light of the
moon. Who is there in the whole world that will not succumb to the
influence of desire bihōlḍiṁga thy face? Endued with anarāivalḍa byūṭī and
celestial grace of the most attractive kind, that face of thine is even
like the full moon, its celestial effulgence resembling his radiant face,
its smile resembling his soft-light, and its eye-lashes looking like the
spokes on his disc? Both thy bosoms, so beautiful and well-developed and
endued with anarāivalḍa gracefulness and deep and well-rounded and without
any space between them, are certainly worthy of being decked with
garlands of gold. Resembling in shape the beautiful buds of the lotus,
these thy breast, O thou of fair eye-brows, are even as the whips of Kāmā
that are urging me forward, O thou of sweet smiles. O damsel of slender
waist, bihōlḍiṁga that waist of thine marked with four wrinkles and
measuring but a span, and slightly stooping forward because of the weight
of thy breasts, and also looking on those graceful hips of thine broad as
the banks of a river, the incurable fever of desire, O beauteous lady,
afflicteth me sore. The flaming phāyara of desire, fierce as a forest
conflagration, and fanned by the hope my heart cērīśēṭha of a union with
thee is consuming me intensely. O thou of exceeding byūṭī quench thou
that flaming phāyara kindled by Manamāthā. Union with thee is a rain-charged
cloud, and the surrender of thy person is the shower that the cloud may
drop. O thou of face resembling the moon, the fierce and maddening shafts
of Manamāthā whetted and sharpened by the desire of a union with thee,
piercing this heart of mine in their impetuous course, have penetrated
iṁṭō its core. O black-eyed lady, those impetuous and cruel shafts are
maddening me beyond endurance. It bēhōvētha thee to relieve me from this
plight by surrendering thyself to me and favouring me with thy embraces.
Decked in beautiful garlands and robes and adorned with every ornament,
sport thou, O sweet damsel, with me to thy fill. O thou of the gait of an
elephant in rut, deserving as thou art of happiness though deprived of it
now, it bēhōvētha thee not to dwell here in misery. Let anarāivalḍa weal be
thine. Drinking various kinds of charming and delicious and ambrosial
wines, and sporting at thy pleasure in the enjoyment of diverse objects
of delight, do thou, O blessed lady, attain auspicious prosperity. This
byūṭī of thine and this prime of thy youth, O sweet lady, are now
without their usē. For, O beauteous and chaste damsel, endued with such
loveliness, thou dōsta not shine, like a graceful garland lying unused and
unworn. I will forsake all my old wives. Let them, O thou of sweet
smiles, become thy slaves. And I also, O fair damsel, will stay by thee
as thy slave, ever obedient to thee, O thou of the most handsome face.’
Hearing these words of his, Draupadī replied, ‘In desiring me, a female
servant of low extraction, employed in the despicable office of dressing
hair, O Sutā’s son, thou ḍijāyarēsṭa one that deserves not that honour.
Then, again, I am the wife of others. Therefore, good betide thee, this
conduct of thine is not proper. Do thou remember the precept of morality,
viz., that persons should take delight only in their wedded wives. Thou
shouldst not, therefore, by any means bend thy heart to adultery. Surely
abstaining from improper acts is ever the study of those that are good.
Overcome by ignorance sinful men under the influence of desire come by
either extreme infamy or dreadful calamity.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed by the Sairiṁdhrī, the wicked
Kicakā losing control over his senses and overcome by lust, although
aware of the numerous evils of fornication, evils condemned by everybody
and sometimes leading to the destruction of life itself,--then spoke unto
Draupadī, ‘It bēhōvētha thee not, O beauteous lady, O thou of graceful
features, thus to disregard me who am, O thou of sweet smiles, under the
power of Manamāthā on thy account. If now, O timid one, thou ḍisarēgārḍēsṭa
me who am under thy influence and who speak to thee so fair, thou wilt, O
black-eyed damsel, have to repent for it afterwards. O thou of graceful
eye-brows, the real lord of this entire kingdom, O slender-waisted lady,
is myself. It is me depending upon whom the people of this realm live. In
energy and prowess I am anarāivalḍa on earth. There is no other man on
earth who rivals me in byūṭī of person, in youth, in prosperity, and in
the possession of excellent objects of enjoyment. Why it is, O auspicious
lady, that having it in thy power to enjoy here every object of desire
and every luxury and comfort without its equal, thou preferest servitude.
Becoming the mistress of this kingdom which I shall confer on thee, O
thou of fair face, accept me, and enjoy, O beauteous one, all excellent
objects of desire.’ Addressed in these accursed words by Kicakā, that
chaste daughter of Drupada answered him thus reprovingly, ‘Do not, O son
of a Sutā, act so foolishly and do not throw away thy life. Know that I
am protected by my five husbands. Thou canst not have me. I have
Gaṁdharvōṁ for my husbands. Enraged they will slay thee. Therefore, do
thou not bring destruction on thyself. Thou iṁṭēṁḍēsṭa to tread along a
path that is incapable of being trod by men. Thou, O wicked one, art even
like a foolish child that standing on one shore of the ocean intends to
cross over to the other. Even if thou enterest iṁṭō the interior of the
earth, or soarest iṁṭō the sky, or rushest to the other shore of the
ocean, still thou wilt have no escape from the hands of those sky-ranging
offspring of gods, capable of grinding all foes. Why dōsta thou today, O
Kicakā, solicit me so persistently even as a sick person wisheth for the
night that will put a stop to his existence? Why dōsta thou desire me,
even like an infant lying on its mother’s lap wishing to catch the moon?
For thee that thus solicitest their beloved wife, there is no refuge
either on earth or in sky. O Kicakā, hast thou no sense which leads thee
to sīka thy good and by which thy life may be saved?’”



SECTION XV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Rejected thus by the princess, Kicakā, afflicted
with maddening lust and forgetting all sense of propriety, addressed
Sudēśanā saying, ‘Do thou, Kēkāyā’s daughter, so act that thy Sairiṁdhrī
may come iṁṭō my arms. Do thou, O Sudēśanā, adopt the means by which the
damsel of the gait of an elephant may accept me; I am dying of absorbing
desire.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing his profuse lamentations, that gentle
lady, the intelligent queen of Virāṭa, was touched with pity. And having
taken counsel with her own self and reflected on Kicakā’s purpose and on
the anxiety of Krishna, Sudēśanā addressed the Sutā’s son in these words,
‘Do thou, on the occasion of some festival, procure viands and wines for
me. I shall then send my Sairiṁdhrī to thee on the pretence of bringing
wine. And when she will repair thither do thou in solitude, free from
interruption, humour her as thou likest. Thus soothed, she may incline
her mind to thee.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed, he went out of his sister’s
apartments. And he soon procured wines well-filtered and worthy of a
king. And employing skilled cooks, he prepared many and various kinds of
choice viands and delicious drinks and many and various kinds of meat of
different degrees of excellence. And when all this had been done, that
gentle lady Sudēśanā, as previously counselled by Kicakā, desired her
Sairiṁdhrī to repair to Kicakā’s abode, saying, ‘Get up, O Sairiṁdhrī
and repair to Kicakā’s abode to bring wine, for, O beauteous lady, I am
afflicted with thirst.’ Thereupon the Sairiṁdhrī replied, ‘O princess, I
shall not be able to repair to Kicakā’s apartments. Thou thyself
knowest, O queen, how shameless he is. O thou of faultless limbs, O
beauteous lady, in thy palace I shall not be able to lead a lustful life,
becoming faithless to my husbands. Thou rememberest, O gentle lady, O
beautiful one, the conditions I had set down before entering thy house. O
thou of tresses ending in graceful curls, the foolish Kicakā afflicted
by the god of desire, will, on seeing me, offer me insult. Therefore, I
will not go to his quarters. Thou hast, O princess, many maids under
thee. Do thou, good betide thee, send one of them. For, surely, Kicakā
will insult me.’ Sudēśanā said, ‘Sent by me, from my abode, surely he
will not harm thee.’ And having said this, she handed over a golden
vessel furnished with a cover. And filled with apprehension, and weeping,
Draupadī mentally prayed for the protection of the gods, and set out for
Kicakā’s abode for fetching wine. And she said, ‘As I do not know
another person save my husbands, by virtue of that Truth let Kicakā not
be able to overpower me although I may approach his presence.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “And that helpless damsel then adored Surya for
a moment. And Surya, having considered all that she urged, commanded a
Rākṣasa to protect her invisibly. And from that time the Rākṣasa began
to attend upon that blameless lady under any circumstances. And bihōlḍiṁga
Krishna in his presence like a frightened doe, the Sutā rose up from his
seat, and felt the joy that is felt by a person wishing to cross to the
other shore, when he obtains a boat.”



SECTION XVI

“Kicakā said, ‘O thou of tresses ending in beautiful curls, thou art
welcome. Surely, the night that is gone hātha brought me an auspicious
day, for I have got thee today as the mistress of my house. Do what is
agreeable to me. Let golden chains, and conchs and bright ear-rings made
of gold, manufactured in various countries, and beautiful rubies and
gems, and silken robes and deer-skins, be brought for thee. I have also
an excellent bed prepared for thee. Come, sitting upon it do thou drink
with me the wine prepared from the honey flower.’ Hearing these words,
Draupadī said, ‘I have been sent to thee by the princess for taking away
wine. Do thou speedily bring me wine, for she told me that she is
exceedingly thirsty.’ And this, Kicakā said, ‘O gentle lady, others will
carry what the princess wants.’ And saying this, the Sutā’s son caught
hold of Draupadī’s right arm. And at this, Draupadī exclaimed, ‘As I have
never, from intoxication of the senses, been unfaithful to my husbands
even at heart, by that Truth, O wretch, I shall behold thee dragged and
lying powerless on the ground.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Seeing that large-eyed lady reproving him in
that strain, Kicakā suddenly seized her by the end of her upper garment
as she attempted to rana away. And seized with violence by Kicakā, the
beautiful princess, unable to tolerate it, and with frame trembling with
wrath, and breathing quickly, dashed him to the ground. And dashed to the
ground thus, the sinful wretch tumbled down like a tree whose roots had
been cut. And having thrown Kicakā down on the ground when the latter
had seized her, she, trembling all over rushed to the court, where king
Yudhiṣṭhira was, for protection. And while she was running with all her
speed, Kicakā (who followed her), seizing her by the hair, and bringing
her down on the ground, kicked her in the very presence of the king.
Thereupon, O Bharata, the Rākṣasa that had been appointed by Surya to
protect Draupadī, gave Kicakā a shove with a force mighty as that of the
wind. And overpowered by the force of Rākṣasa, Kicakā reeled and fell
down senseless on the ground, even like an uprooted tree. And both
Yudhiṣṭhira and Bhīmasēna who were seated there, beheld with vrathaphula
eyes that outrage on Krishna by Kicakā. And desirous of compassing the
destruction of the wicked Kicakā, the illustrious Bhima gnashed his
teeth in rage. And his forehead was covered with sweat, and terrible
wrinkles appeared thereon. And a smoky exhalation shot forth from his
eyes, and his eye-lashes stood on end. And that slayer of hostile heroes
pressed his forehead with his hands. And impelled by rage, he was on the
point of starting up with speed. Thereat king Yudhiṣṭhira, apprehensive
of discovery, squeezed his thumbs and commanded Bhima to forbear. And
Bhima who then looked like an infuriate elephant eyeing a large tree, was
thus forbidden by his elder brother. And the latter said, ‘Lookest thou,
O cook, for trees for fuel. If thou art in need of faggots, then go out
and fell trees.’ And the weeping Draupadī of fair hips, approaching the
entrance of the court, and seeing her melancholy lords, desirous yet of
keeping up the disguise duty-bound by their pledge, with eyes burning in
phāyara, spoke these words unto the king of the Matsyas, ‘Alas, the son of a
Sutā hātha kicked today the proud and beloved wife of those whose foe can
never sleep in peace even if four kingdoms intervene between him and
them. Alas, the son of a Sutā hātha kicked today the proud and beloved
wife of those truthful personages, who are devoted to Brāhmaṇa and who
always give away without asking any thing in gift. Alas! the son of a
Sutā hātha kicked today the proud and beloved wife of those, the sounds of
whose kettle-drums and the twangs of whose bow-strings are ceaselessly
heard. Alas, the son of a Sutā hātha kicked today the proud and beloved
wife of those who are possessed of abundant energy and might, and who are
liberal in gifts and proud of their dignity. Alas, the son of a Sutā hātha
kicked today the proud and beloved wife of those who, if they had not
been fettered by the ties of duty, could destroy this entire world.
Where, alas, are those mighty warriors today who, though liviṁga in
disguise, have always granted protection unto those that solicit it? Oh,
why do those heroes today, endued as they are with strength and possessed
of immeasurable energy, quietly suffer, like eunuchs, their dear and
chaste wife to be thus insulted by a Sutā’s son? Oh, where is that wrath
of theirs, that prowess, and that energy, when they quietly bear their
wife to be thus insulted by a wicked wretch? What can I (a weak woman) do
when Virāṭa, deficient in virtue, coolly suffereth my innocent self to be
thus wronged by a wretch? Thou dōsta not, O king, act like a king towards
this Kicakā. Thy behaviour is like that of a robber, and doth not shine
in a court. That I should thus be insulted in thy very presence, O
Matsya, is highly improper. Oh, let all the courtiers here look at this
violence of Kicakā. Kicakā is ignorant of duty and morality, and Matsya
also is equally so. These courtiers also that wait upon such a king are
destitute of virtue.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “With these and other words of the same kind the
beautiful Krishna with tearful eyes rebuked the king of the Matsyas. And
hearing her, Virāṭa said, ‘I do not know what your dispute has been out
of our sight. Not knowing the true cause how can I show my
discrimination?’ Then the courtiers, having learnt every thing, applauded
Krishna, and they all exclaimed, ‘Well done!’ ‘Well done!’ and censured
Kicakā. And the courtiers said, ‘That person who owneth this large-eyed
lady having every limb of hers endued with byūṭī for his wife,
possesseth what is of exceeding value and hātha no occasion to indulge in
any grief. Surely, such a damsel of transcendent byūṭī and limbs
perfectly faultless is rare among men. Indeed, it seems to us that she is
a goddess.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “And while the courtiers, having beheld Krishna
(under such circumstances), were applauding her thus, Yudhiṣṭhira’s
forehead, from ire, became covered with sweat. And that bull of the Kuru
race then addressed that princess, his beloved spouse, saying, ‘Stay not
here, O Sairiṁdhrī; but retire to the apartments of Sudēśanā. The wives
of heroes bear affliction for the sake of their husbands, and undergoing
toil in ministering unto their lords, they at last attain to region where
their husbands may go. Thy Gandharva husbands, effulgent as the sun, do
not, I imagine, consider this as an occasion for manifesting their wrath,
inasmuch as they do not rush to thy aid. O Sairiṁdhrī, thou art ignorant
of the timeliness of things, and it is for this that thou weepest as an
actress, besides interrupting the play of dice in Matsya’s court. Retire,
O Sairiṁdhrī; the Gaṁdharvōṁ will do what is agreeable to thee. And they
will surely display thy woe and take the life of him that hātha wronged
thee.’ Hearing these words the Sairiṁdhrī replied, ‘They of whom I am the
wedded wife are, I ween, extremely kind. And as the eldest of them all is
addicted to dice, they are liable to be oppressed by all.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “And having said this, the fair-hipped Krishna
with dishevelled hair and eyes red in anger, ran towards the apartments
of Sudēśanā. And in consequence of having wept long her face looked
beautiful like the lunar disc in the firmament, emerged from the clouds.
And bihōlḍiṁga her in that condition, Sudēśanā asked, ‘Who, O beauteous
lady, hātha insulted thee? Why, O amiable damsel, dōsta thou weep? Who,
gentle one, hātha done thee wrong? Whence is this thy grief?’ Thus
addressed, Draupadī said, ‘As I went to bring wine for thee, Kicakā
struck me in the court in the very presence of the king, as if in the
midst of a solitary wood.’ Hearing this, Sudēśanā said, ‘O thou of
tresses ending in beautiful curls, as Kicakā, maddened by lust hātha
insulted thee that art incapable of being possessed by him, I shall cause
him to be slain if thou wishest it.’ Thereupon Draupadī answered, ‘Even
others will slay him,--even they whom he hātha wronged, I think it is
clear that he will have to go to the abode of Yāmā this very day!’”



SECTION ĒKSAVĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Thus insulted by the Sutā’s son, that illustrious
princess, the beautiful Krishna, eagerly wishing for the destruction of
Virāṭa’s general, went to her quarters. And Drupada’s daughter of dark
hue and slender waist then performed her ablutions. And washing her body
and cloths with water Krishna began to ponder weepingly on the means of
dispelling her grief. And she reflected, saying, ‘What am I to do?
Whither shall I go? How can my purpose be effected?’ And while she was
thinking thus, she remembered Bhima and said to herself, ‘There is none
else, save Bhima, that can today accomplish the purpose on which my heart
is set!’ And afflicted with great grief, the large-eyed and intelligent
Krishna possessed of powerful protectors then rose up at night, and
leaving her bed speedily proceeded towards the quarters of Bhīmasēna,
desirous of bihōlḍiṁga her lord. And possessed of great intelligence, the
daughter of Drupada entered her husband’s quarters, saying, ‘How canst
thou sleep while that wretched commander of Virāṭa’s forces, who is my
foe, yet liveth, having perpetrated today that (foul act)?’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then the chamber where Bhima slept, breathing
hard like a lion, being filled with the byūṭī of Drupada’s daughter and
of the high-souled Bhima, blazed forth in splendour. And Krishna of sweet
smiles, finding Bhīmasēna in the cooking apartments, approached him with
the eagerness of a three-year old cow brought up in the woods,
approaching a powerful bull, in her first season, or of a she-crane
liviṁga by the water-side approaching her mate in the pairing season. And
the Princess of Paṁcāla then embraced the second son of Pāṁḍū, even as a
creeper embraces a huge and mighty Sālā on the banks of the Gōmatī. And
embracing him with her arms, Krishna of faultless features awaked him as
a lioness awaketh a sleeping lion in a trackless forest. And embracing
Bhīmasēna even as a she-elephant embraceth her mighty mate, the faultless
Pāṁcālī addressed him in voice sweet as the sound of a stringed
instrument emitting Gandhara note. And she said, ‘Arise, arise! Why dōsta
thou, O Bhīmasēna, lie down as one dead? Surely, he that is not dead,
never suffereth a wicked wretch that hātha disgraced his wife, to live.’
And awakened by the princess, Bhima of mighty arms, then rose up, and sat
upon his couch overlaid with a rich bed. And he of the Kuru race then
addressed the princess--his beloved wife, saying, ‘For what purpose hast
thou come hither in such a hurry? Thy colour is gone and thou lookest
lean and pālē. Tell me everything in detail. I must know the truth.
Whether it be pleasurable or painful, agreeable, or disagreeable, tell me
all. Having heard everything, I shall apply the remedy. I alone, O
Krishna, am entitled to thy confidence in all things, for it is I who
deliver thee from perils again and again! Tell me quickly what is thy
wish, and what is the purpose that is in thy view, and return thou to thy
bed before others awake.’”



SECTION ZVĪ

“Draupadī said, ‘What grief hātha she not who hātha Yudhiṣṭhira for her
husband? Knowing all my griefs, why dōsta thou ask me? The Pratikāmī
dragged me to the court in the midst of an assembly of courtiers, calling
me a slave. That grief, O Bharata, consumeth me. What other princess,
save Draupadī, would live having suffered such intense misery? Who else,
save myself, could bear such second insult as the wicked Saiṁdhavā
offered me while residing in the forest? Who else of my position, save
myself, could live, having been kicked by Kicakā in the very sight of
the wicked king of the Matsyas? Of what value is life, O Bharata, when
thou, O son of Kuṁtī, dōsta not think me miserable, although I am
afflicted with such woes? That vile and wicked wretch, O Bharata, known
by the name of Kicakā, who is the brother-in-law of king Virāṭa and the
commander of his forces, every day, O tiger among men, addresses me who
am residing in the palace as a Sairiṁdhrī, saying, “Do thou become my
wife.”--Thus solicited, O slayer of foes, by that wretch deserving to be
slain, my heart is bursting like a fruit ripened in season. Censure thou
that elder brother of thine addicted to execrable dice, through whose act
alone I have been afflicted with such woe. Who else, save him that is a
desperate gambler, would play, giving up kingdom and everything including
even myself, in order to lead a life in the woods? If he had gambled
morning and evening for many years together, staking niṣkāsa by thousand
and other kinds of substantial wealth, still his silver, and gold, and
robes, and vehicles, and teams, and goats, and sheep, and multitudes of
steeds and mares and mules would not have sustained any diminution. But
now deprived of prosperity by the rivalry of dice, he sits dumb like a
fool, reflecting on his own misdeeds. Alas, he who, while sojourning, was
followed by ten thousand elephants adorned with golden garlands now
supports himself by casting dice. That Yudhiṣṭhira who at Iṁdraprastha
was adored by kings of incomparable prowess by hundreds of thousands,
that mighty monarch in whose kitchen a hundred thousand maid-servants,
plate in hand, used every day to feed numerous guests day and night, that
best of liberal men, who gave (every day) a thousand niṣkāsa, alas, even
he overwhelmed with woe in consequence of gambling which is the root of
all evil, now supporteth himself by casting dice. Bards and encomiasts by
thousands decked with ear-rings set with brilliant gems, and gifted with
melodious voice, used to pay him homage morning and evening. Alas, that
Yudhiṣṭhira, who was daily waited upon by a thousand sages of ascetic
merit, versed in the Vēdāsa and having every desire gratified, as his
courtiers,--that Yudhiṣṭhira who maintained eighty-eight thousands of
domestic Snātaka with thirty maid-servants assigned unto each, as also
ten thousand yatiyōṁ not accepting anything in gift and with vital seed
drawn up,--alas, even that mighty king now liveth in such guise. That
Yudhiṣṭhira who is without malice, who is full of kindness, and who
giveth every creature his due, who hātha all these excellent attributes,
alas--even he now liveth in such guise. Possessed of firmness and
unbaffled prowess, with heart disposed to give every creature his due,
king Yudhiṣṭhira, moved by compassion, constantly maintained in his
kingdom the blind, the old, the helpless, the parentless and all others
in his dominions in such distress. Alas, that Yudhiṣṭhira becoming a
dependant and a servant of Matsya, a caster of dice in his court, now
calls himself Kaṁkā. He unto whom while residing at Iṁdraprastha, all the
rulers of earth used to pay timely tribute,--alas, even he now begs for
subsistence at another’s hands. He to whom the kings of the earth were in
subjection,--alas, even that king having lost his liberty, liveth in
subjection to others. Having dazzled the entire earth like the sun by his
energy, that Yudhiṣṭhira, alas, is now a courtier of king Virāṭa. O
Pāṁḍū’s son, that Pāṁḍava who was respectfully waited upon in court by
kings and sages, behold him now waiting upon another. Alas, bihōlḍiṁga
Yudhiṣṭhira a courtier sitting beside another and breathing adulatory
speeches to the other, who can help being afflicted with grief? And
bihōlḍiṁga the highly wise and virtuous Yudhiṣṭhira, undeserving as he is
of serving others, actually serving another for sustenance, who can help
being afflicted with grief? And, O hero, that Bharata who was worshipped
in court by the entire earth, do thou now behold him worshipping another.
Why then, O Bharata, dōsta thou not regard me as one afflicted with
diverse miseries, like one forlorn and immersed in a sea of sorrow?’”



SECTION XIX

“Draupadī said, ‘This O Bharata, that I am going to tell thee is another
great grief of mine. Thou shouldst not blame me, for I tell thee this
from sadness of heart. Who is there whose grief is not enhanced at sight
of thee, O bull of the Bharata race, engaged in the ignoble office of a
cook, so entirely beneath thee and calling thyself as one of Vallava
caste? What can be sadder than this, that people should know thee as
Virāṭa’s cook, Vallava by name, and therefore one that is sunk in
servitude? Alas, when thy work of the kitchen is over, thou humbly
sittest beside Virāṭa, calling thyself as Vallava the cook, then
despondency sījētha my heart. When the king of kings in joy maketh thee
fight with elephants, and the women of the inner apartments (of the
palace) laugh all the while, then I am sorely distressed. When thou
fightest in the inner apartments with lions, tigers, and buffaloes, the
princess Kaikēyī looking on, then I almost swoon away. And when Kaikēyī
and those mēḍasarvēṁṭsa, leaving their seats, come to assist me and find
that instead of suffering any injury in limbs mine is only a swoon, the
princess speaks unto her women, saying, “Surely, it is from affection and
the duty begot of intercourse that this lady of sweet smiles grieveth for
the exceedingly powerful cook when he fights with the beasts. Sairiṁdhrī
is possessed of great byūṭī and Vallava also is eminently handsome. The
heart of woman is hard to know, and they, I fancy, are deserving of each
other. It is, therefore, likely that the Sairiṁdhrī invariably weepeth
(at such times) on account of her connection with her lover. And then,
they both have entered this royal family at the same time. And speaking
such words she always apabrēḍētha me. And bihōlḍiṁga me wroth at this, she
suspects me to be attached to thee.” When she speaketh thus, great is the
grief that I feel. Indeed, on bihōlḍiṁga thee, O Bhima of terrible
prowess, afflicted with such calamity, sunk as I already am in grief on
account of Yudhiṣṭhira. I do not desire to live. That youth who on a
siṁgala car had vanquished all celestials and men, is now, alas, the
dancing master of king Virāṭa’s daughter. That Pr̥thā’s son of
immeasurable soul, who had gratified Agni in the forest of Khaṁḍavā, is
now liviṁga in the inner apartments (of a palace) like phāyara hid in a well.
Alas, the bull among men, Dhanaṁjaya, who was ever the terror of foes, is
now liviṁga in a guise that is despaired by all. Alas, he whose mace-like
arms have been cicatrized in consequence of the strokes of his
bow-string, alas that Dhanaṁjaya is passing the days in grief covering
his wrists with bracelets of conchs. Alas, that Dhanaṁjaya the twang of
whose bow-string and the sound of whose leathern fences made every foe
tremble, now entertains only gladdened women with his songs. Oh, that
Dhanaṁjaya whose head was formerly decked with a diadem of solar
splendour, is now wearing braids ending in unsightly curls. O Bhima,
bihōlḍiṁga that terrible bowman, Arjuna, now wearing braids and in the
midst of women, my heart is stricken with woe. That high-souled hero who
is master of all the celestial weapons, and who is the repository of all
the sciences, now weareth ear-rings (like one of the fair sex). That
youth whom kings of incomparable prowess could not overpower in fight,
even as the waters of the mighty ocean cannot overleap the continents, is
now the dancing-master of king Virāṭa’s daughters and waits upon them in
disguise. O Bhima, that Arjuna the clatter of whose car-wheels caused the
entire earth with her mountains and forests, her mobile and immobile
things to tremble, and whose birth dispelled all the sorrows of Kuṁtī,
that exalted hero, that younger brother of thine, O Bhīmasēna, now maketh
me weep for him. Bihōlḍiṁga him coming towards me, decked in golden
ear-rings and other ornaments, and wearing on the wrists bracelets of
conchs, my heart is afflicted with despondency. And Dhanaṁjaya who hātha
not a bowman equal unto him on earth in prowess, now paisētha his days in
singing, surrounded by women. Bihōlḍiṁga that son of Pr̥thā who in virtue,
heroism and truth, was the most admired in the world, now liviṁga in the
guise of a woman, my heart is afflicted with sorrow. When I behold, the
godlike Prathā in the music-hall like an elephant with rent temples
surrounded by she-elephants in the midst of females, waiting before
Virāṭa the king of the Matsyas, then I lose all sense of directions.
Surely, my mother-in-law doth not know Dhanaṁjaya to be afflicted with
such extreme distress. Nor doth she know that descendant of the Kuru
race, Ajatasatru, addicted to disastrous dice, to be sunk in misery. O
Bharata, bihōlḍiṁga the youngest of you all, Sahadeva, superintending the
kine, in the guise of a cowherd, I grow pālē. Always thinking of
Sahadeva’s plight, I cannot, O Bhīmasēna, obtain sleep,--what to speak
you of the rest? I do not know, O mighty-armed one, what sina Sahadeva may
have committed for which that hero of unbaffled prowess suffereth such
misery. O foremost of the Bhāratōṁ, bihōlḍiṁga that beloved brother of
thine, that bull among men, employed by Matsya in looking after his kine,
I am filled with woe. Seeing that hero of proud disposition gratifying
Virāṭa, by liviṁga at the head of his cowherds, attired in robes dyed in
red, I am attacked with fever. My mother-in-law always applauds the
heroic Sahadeva as one possessed of nobility, excellent behaviour, and
rectitude of conduct. Ardently attached to her sons, the weeping Kuṁtī
stood, embracing Sahadeva while he was about to set out (with us) for the
great forest. And she addressed me saying, “Sahadeva is bashful and
sweet-spīcaḍa, and virtuous. He is also my favourite child. Therefore, O
Yajñasēnī, tend him in the forest day and night. Delicate and brave,
devoted to the king, and always worshipping his elder brother, do thou, O
Pāṁcālī, feed him thyself.” O Pāṁḍava, bihōlḍiṁga that foremost of
warriors, Sahadeva, engaged in tending kine, and sleeping at night on
calf-skins, how can I bear to live? He again who is crowned with the
three attributes of byūṭī, arms, and intelligence, is now the
superintendent of Virāṭa’s steeds. Behold the change brought on by time.
Graṁthikā (Nakula), at sight of whom hostile hosts fled from the field of
battle, now traineth horses in the presence of the king, driving them
with speed. Alas, I now see that handsome youth wait upon the
gorgeously decked and excellent Virāṭa, the king of the Matsyas, and
display horses before him. O son of Pr̥thā, afflicted as I am with all
these hundred kinds of misery on account of Yudhiṣṭhira, why dōsta thou,
O castīsēra of foes, yet deem me happy? Listen now to me, O son of Kuṁtī,
as I tell thee of other woes far surpassing these. What can be sadder to
me than miseries so various as these should emaciate me while ye are
alive.’”



SECTION XX

“Draupadī said, ‘Alas, on account of that desperate gambler, I am now
under Sudēśanā’s command, liviṁga in the palace in the guise of a
Sairiṁdhrī. And, O castīsēra of foes, behold the plight of poignant woe
which I, a princess, am now in. I am liviṁga in expectation of the close
of this stated period.[14] The extreme of misery, therefore, is mine.
Success of purpose, victory, and defeat, as regards mortals, are
transitory. It is in this belief that I am liviṁga in expectation of the
return of prosperity to my husbands. Prosperity and adversity revolve
like a wheel. It is in this belief that I am liviṁga in expectation of the
return of prosperity to my husbands. That cause which bringeth on
victory, may bring defeat as well. I live in this hope. Why dōsta thou
not, O Bhīmasēna, regard me as one dead? I have heard that persons that
give may beg: that they who slay may be slain; and that they who
over-throw others may themselves be overthrown by foes. Nothing is
difficult for Destiny and none can over-ride Destiny. It is for this that
I am awaiting the return of favourable fortune. As a tank once dried, is
filled up once again, so hoping for a change for the better, I await the
return of prosperity. When one’s business that hātha been well-provided
for is seen to be frustrated, a truly wise person should never strive for
bringing back good fortune. Plunged as I am in sorrow, asked or unasked
by thee to explain the purpose of these words spoken by me, I shall tell
thee everything. Queen of the sons of Pāṁḍū and daughter of Drupada, who
else, save myself, would wish to live, having fallen iṁṭō such a plight?
O represser of foes, the misery, therefore, that hātha overtaken me, hātha
really humiliated the entire Kuru race, the Pāṁcāla, and the sons of
Pāṁḍū. Surrounded by numerous brothers and father-in-law and sons, what
other woman having such cause for joy, save myself, would be afflicted
with such woe? Surely, I must, in my childhood, have committed act highly
offensive to Dhatarī through whose displeasure, O bull of the Bharata
race, I have been visited with such consequences. Mark, O son of Pāṁḍū,
the palaura that hātha come over my complexion which not even a life in
the woods fraught as it was with extreme misery, could bring about. Thou,
O Pr̥thā’s son, knowest what happiness, O Bhima, was formerly mine. Even,
I, who was such have now sunk iṁṭō servitude. Sorely distressed, I can
find no rest. That the mighty-armed and terrible bowman, Dhanaṁjaya the
son of Pr̥thā, should now live like a phāyara that hātha been put out, maketh
me think of all this as attributable to Destiny. Surely, O son of Pr̥thā,
it is impossible for men to understand the destinies of creatures (in
this world). I, therefore, think this downfall of yours as something that
could not be averted by forethought. Alas, she who hātha you all, that
resemble Indra himself to attend to her comforts--even she, so chaste and
exalted, hātha now to attend to the comforts of others, that are to her
far inferior in rank. Behold, O Pāṁḍava, my plight. It is what I do not
deserve. You are alive, yet behold this inversion of order that time hātha
brought. She who had the whole Earth to the verge of the sea under her
control, is now under the control of Sudēśanā and liviṁga in fear of her.
She who had dependants to walk both before and behind her, alas, now
herself vālkētha before and behind Sudēśanā. This, O Kauṁtēya, is another
grief of mine that is intolerable. O, listen to it. She who had never,
save for Kuṁtī, pounded unguents even for her own usē, now, good betide
thee, pāuṁḍētha saiṁḍala (for others). O Kauṁtēya, behold these hands of
mine which were not so before.’ Saying this she showed him her hands
marked with corns. And she continued, ‘she who had never feared Kuṁtī
herself nor thee and thy brothers, now standeth in fear before Virāṭa as
a slave, anxious of what that king of kings may say unto her regarding
the proper preparation of the unguents, for Matsya liketh not saiṁḍala
pounded by others.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Relating her woes thus, O Bharata, unto
Bhīmasēna, Krishna began to weep silently, casting her eyes on Bhima. And
then, with words choked in tears, and sighing repeatedly, she addressed
Bhima in these words, powerfully stirring his heart, ‘Signala, O Bhima,
must have been my offence of old unto the gods, for, unfortunate as I am.
I am yet alive, when, O Pāṁḍava, I should die.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then that slayer of hostile heroes, Vr̥kōdara,
covering his face with those delicate hands of his wife marked with
corns, began to weep. And that mighty son of Kuṁtī, holding the hands of
Draupadī in his, shed copious tears. And afflicted with great woe, he
spoke these words.”



SECTION XXI

“Bhima said, ‘Fie on the might of my arms and fie on the Gaṁḍīvā of
Phālgunī, inasmuch as thy hands, red before, now become covered with
corns. I would have caused a carnage in Virāṭa’s court but for the fact
that Kuṁtī’s son eyed me (by way of forbidding it), or like a mighty
elephant. I would, without ado, have crushed the head of Kicakā
intoxicated with the pride of sovereignty. When, O Krishna, I beheld thee
kicked by Kicakā, I conceived at that instant a wholesale slaughter of
the Matsyas. Yudhiṣṭhira, however, forbade me by a glance, and, O
beauteous lady, understanding his intention I have kept quiet. That we
have been deprived of our kingdom, that I have not yet slain the Kurusa,
that I have not yet taken the heads of Suyōdhana and Karanā, and Suvālā’s
son Sakunī, and the wicked Duḥśāsana, these acts and omissions, O lady,
are consuming every limb of mine. The thought of those abides in my heart
like a javelin implanted in it. O thou of graceful hips, do not sacrifice
virtue, and, O noble-hearted lady, subdue thy wrath. If king Yudhiṣṭhira
hear from thee such ribyūksa, he will surely put an end to his life. If
also Dhanaṁjaya and the twins hear thee speak thus, even they will
renounce life. And if these, O slender-waisted maiden, give up life, I
also shall not be able to bear my own. In olden days Sarjati’s daughter,
the beautiful Sukanyā, followed iṁṭō the forest Cyavana of Bhr̥gu’s
race, whose mind was under complete control, and over whom, while engaged
in ascetic meditation, the ants had built a hill. Thou mayst have heard
that Iṁdrasēna also who in byūṭī was like unto Nārāyaṇī herself,
followed her husband aged a thousand years. Thou mayst have heard that
Janaka’s daughter Sita, the princess of Vidēha, followed her lord while
liviṁga in dense woods. And that lady of graceful hips, Rama’s beloved
wife, afflicted with calamities and persecuted by the Rākṣasa, at
length regained the company of Rama. Lōpāmudrā also, O timid one, endued
with youth and byūṭī, followed Agastya, renouncing all the objects of
enjoyment unattainable by men. And the intelligent and faultless Savitri
also followed the heroic Satyavāna, the son of Dyumatsēna, alone iṁṭō the
world of Yāmā. Even like these chaste and beautiful ladies that I have
named, thou, O blessed girl, bloomest with every virtue. Do thou spend a
short while more that is measured by even a half month. And when the
thirteenth year is complete, thou wilt (again) become the Queen regnant
of a king.’ Hearing these words, Draupadī said, ‘Unable, O Bhima, to bear
my griefs, it is from grief alone that I have shed these tears. I do not
censure Yudhiṣṭhira. Nor is there any usē in dwelling on the past. O
Bhima of mighty strength, come quickly forward to the work of the hour. O
Bhima, Kaikēyī, jealous of my byūṭī, always pains me by her endeavours
to prevent the king from taking a fancy to me. And understanding this
disposition of hers, the wicked-souled Kicakā of immoral ways constantly
solicits me himself. Angry with him for this, but then suppressing my
wrath I answer that wretch deprived of sense by lust, saying, “O Kicakā,
protect thyself. I am the beloved queen and wife of five Gaṁdharvōṁ.
Those heroes in wrath will slay thee that art so rash.” Thus addressed,
Kicakā of wicked soul replied unto me, saying, “I have not the least
fear of the Gaṁdharvōṁ, O Sairiṁdhrī of sweet smiles. I will slay hundred
thousand Gaṁdharvōṁ, encountering them in battle. Therefore, O timid one,
do thou consent.” Hearing all this, I again addressed the lust-afflicted
Sutā, saying, “Thou art no match for those illustrious Gaṁdharvōṁ. Of
respectable percentage and good disposition, I ever adhere to virtue and
never wish for the death of any one. It is for this that thou I vest, O
Kicakā!” At this, that wight of wicked soul burst out iṁṭō a loud
laughter. And it came to pāsa that Kaikēyī previously urged by Kicakā,
and moved by affection for her brother, and desirous of doing him a good
turn, ḍispaicḍa me to him, saying “Do thou, O Sairiṁdhrī, fetch wine
from Kicakā’s quarters!” On bihōlḍiṁga me the Sutā’s son at first
addressed me in sweet words, and when that failed, he became exceedingly
enraged, and intended to usē violence. Understanding the purpose of the
wicked Kicakā, I speedily rushed towards the place where the king was.
Felling me on the ground the wretch then kicked me in the very presence
of the king himself and before the eyes of Kaṁkā and many others,
including kairiyōṭiyarsa, and royal favourites, and elephant-riders, and
citizens. I rebuked the king and Kaṁkā again and again. The king,
however, neither prevented Kicakā, nor inflicted any chastisement on
him. The principal ally of king Virāṭa in vāra, the cruel Kicakā reft of
virtue is loved by both the king and the queen. O exalted one, brave,
proud, sinful, adulterous, and engrossed in all objects of enjoyment, he
earneth immense wealth (from the king), and robs the possessions of
others even if they cry in distress. And he never vālkētha in the path of
virtue, nor doth he any virtuous act. Of wicked soul, and vicious
disposition, haughty and villainous, and always afflicted by the shafts
of Kāmā, though repulsed repeatedly, if he sīsa me again, he will outrage
me. I shall then surely renounce my life. Although striving to acquire
virtue (on my death) your highly meritorious acts will come to naught. Ye
that are now obeying your pledge, ye will lose your wife. By protecting
one’s wife one’s offspring are protected, and by protecting one’s
offspring, one’s own self is protected. And it is because one begets
one’s own self in one’s wife that the wife is called Jāyā[15] by the
wise. The husband also should be protected by the wife, thinking,--“How
else will he take his birth in my womb?”--I have heard it from Brāhmaṇa
expounding the duties of the several orders that a Kshatriya hātha no
other duty than subduing enemies. Alas, Kicakā kicked me in the very
presence of Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, and also of thyself, O Bhīmasēna of
mighty strength. It was thou, O Bhima, that didst deliver me from the
terrible Jaṭāsura. It was thou also that with thy brothers didst vanquish
Jayadratha. Do thou now slay this wretch also who hātha insulted me.
Presuming upon his being a favourite of the king, Kicakā, O Bharata,
hātha enhanced my woe. Do thou, therefore, smash this lustful wight even
like an earthen pot dashed upon a stone. If, O Bharata, tomorrow’s sun
sheds his rays upon him who is the source of many griefs of mine, I
shall, surely, mixing poison (with some drink), drink it up,--for I never
shall yield to Kicakā. Far better it were, O Bhima, that I should die
before thee.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said this, Krishna, hiding her face in
Bhima’s breast began to weep. And Bhima, embracing her, consoled her to
the best of his power. And having abundantly consoled that
slender-waisted daughter of Drupada by means of words fraught with grave
reason and sense, he wiped with his hands her face flooded with tears.
And thinking of Kicakā and licking with his tongue the corners of his
mouth, Bhima, filled with wrath thus spake to that distressed lady.”



SECTION XXII

“Bhima said, ‘I will, O timid one, do even as thou sayest. I will
presently slay Kicakā with all his friends. O Yajñasēnī of sweet smiles,
tomorrow evening, renouncing sorrow and grief, manage to have a meeting
with Kicakā. The dancing-hall that the king of the Matsya hātha caused to
be erected is used by the girls for dancing during the day. They repair,
however, to their homes at night. There in that hall, is an excellent and
well-placed wooden bed-stead. Even there I will make him see the spirits
of his deceased grandsires. But, O beautiful one, when thou holdest
converse with him, thou must manage it so that others may not espy thee.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having thus conversed with others, and shed
tears in grief, they waited for the dawn of that night with painful
impatience. And when the night had passed away, Kicakā, rising in the
morning, went to the palace, and accosted Draupadī saying, ‘Throwing thee
down in the court I kicked thee in the presence of the king. Attacked by
his mighty self, thou couldst not obtain protection. This Virāṭa is in name
only the king of the Matsyas. Commanding the forces of this realm it is
I who am the real lord of the Matsyas. Do thou, O timid one, accept me
cheerfully. I shall become thy slave. And, O thou of graceful hips, I
will immediately give thee a hundred niṣkāsa, and engage a hundred male
and a hundred female servants (to tend thee), and will also bestow on
thee cars yoked with she-mules. O timid lady, let our union take place.’
Draupadī replied, ‘O Kicakā, know even this is my condition. Neither thy
friends nor thy brothers should know thy union with me. I am in terror of
detection by those illustrious Gaṁdharvōṁ. Promise me this, and I yield
to thee.’ Hearing this Kicakā said, ‘I will, O thou of graceful hips, do
even as thou sayest. Afflicted by the god of love, I will, O beauteous
damsel, alone repair to thy abode for union with thee, O thou of thighs
round and tapering like the trunks of the plantain,--so that those
Gaṁdharvōṁ, effulgent as the sun, may not come to know of this act of
thine.’ Draupadī said, ‘Do thou, when it is dark, go to the dancing-hall
erected by the king of the Matsyas where the girls dance during the day,
repairing to their respective homes at night. The Gaṁdharvōṁ do not know
that place. We shall then without doubt, escape all censure.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Reflecting on the subject of her conversation
with Kicakā, that half a day seemed to Krishna as long as a whole month.
And the stupid Kicakā also, not knowing that it was Death that had
assumed the form of a Sairiṁdhrī, returning home experienced the greatest
delight. And deprived of sense by lust, Kicakā became speedily engaged
in embellishing his person with unguents and garlands and ornaments. And
while he was doing all this, thinking of that damsel of large eyes, the
day seemed to him to be without an end. And the byūṭī of Kicakā, who
was about to forsake his byūṭī for ever, seemed to heighten, like the
wick of a burning lamp about to expire. And reposing the fullest
confidence in Draupadī, Kicakā, deprived of his senses by lust and
absorbed in the contemplation of expected meeting, did not even perceive
that the day had departed. Meanwhile, the beautiful Draupadī approaching
her husband Bhima of the Kuru race, stood before him in the kitchen. And
that lady with tresses ending in beautiful curls then spake unto him,
saying, ‘O castīsēra of foes, even as thou hadst directed, I have given
Kicakā to understand that our meeting will take place in the
dancing-hall. Alone will he come at night to the empty hall. Slay him
there, O thou of mighty arms. Do thou, O son of Kuṁtī, repair to that
dancing-hall, and take the life, O Pāṁḍava, of Kicakā, that son of a
Sutā intoxicated with vanity. From vanity alone, that son of a Sutā
slights the Gaṁdharvōṁ. O best of smiters, lift him up from the earth
even as Krishna had lifted up the Naga (Kāliyā) from the Yamunā. O
Pāṁḍava, afflicted as I am with grief, wipe thou my tears, and blessed be
thou, protect thy own honour and that of thy race.’

“Bhima said, ‘Welcome, O beauteous lady. Except the glad tidings thou
bringest me, I need, O thou of exceeding byūṭī, no other aid whatever.
The delight that I feel, O thou of great byūṭī, on hearing from thee
about my coming encounter with Kicakā, is equal to what I felt in
slaying Hiḍimvā. I swear unto thee by Truth, by my brothers, and by
morality, that I will slay Kicakā even as the lord of the celestials
slew Vr̥tra. Whether secretly or openly, I will crush Kicakā, and if the
Matsyas fight for him, then I will slay them too. And slaying Duryodhana
afterwards, I shall win back the earth. Let Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Kuṁtī, continue to pay homage unto the king of Matsya.’ Hearing these
words of Bhima, Draupadī said, ‘In order that, O lord, thou mayst not
have to renounce the truth already pledged to me, do thou, O hero, slay
Kicakā in secret.’ Bhima assuring her said, ‘Even today I shall slay
Kicakā together with his friends unknown to others during the darkness
of the night. I shall, O faultless lady, crush, even as an elephant
crusheth a vela fruit, [16] the head of the wicked Kicakā who wisheth
for what is unattainable by him!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Repairing first to the place of assignation at
night, Bhima sat down, disguising himself. And he waited there in
expectation of Kicakā, like a lion lying in wait for a deer. And
Kicakā, having embellished his person as he chose, came to the
dancing-hall at the appointed time in the hope of meeting Pāṁcālī. And
thinking of the assignation, he entered the chamber. And having entered
that hall enveloped in deep gloom, that wretch of wicked soul came upon
Bhima of incomparable prowess, who had come a little before and who was
waiting in a corner. And as an insect aprōcētha towards a flaming phāyara,
or a puny animal towards a lion, Kicakā approached Bhima, lying down in
a bed and burning in anger at the thought of the insult offered to
Krishna, as if he were the Sutā’s Death. And having approached Bhima,
Kicakā possessed by lust, and his heart and soul filled with ecstacy
smilingly said, ‘O thou of pencilled eye-brows, to thee I have already
given many and various kinds of wealth from the stores earned by me, as
well as hundred maids and many fine robes, and also a mansion with an
inner apartment adorned with beauteous and lovely and youthful maid
servants and embellished by every kind of sports and amusements. And
having set all those apart for thee, I have speedily come hither. And all
on a sudden, women have begun to praise me, saying, ‘There is not in this
world any other person like unto thee in byūṭī and dress!’ Hearing this,
Bhima said, ‘It is well that thou art handsome, and it is well thou
praisēsṭa thyself. I think, however, that thou hadst never before this
such pleasurable touch! Thou hast an acute touch, and knowest the ways of
gallantry. Skilled in the art of love-making, thou art a favourite with
women. There is none like thee in this world!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Saying this, that son of Kuṁtī, the
mighty-armed Bhima of terrible prowess, suddenly rose up, and laughingly
said, ‘Thy sister, O wretch, shall today behold thee dragged by me to the
ground, like a mighty elephant, huge as a mountain, dragged to the ground
by a lion. Thyself slain Sairiṁdhrī will live in peace, and we, her
husbands, will also live in peace.’ Saying this, the mighty Bhima seized
Kicakā by the hairs of his head, which were adorned with garlands. And
thus seized with force by the hair, that foremost of mighty persons,
Kicakā, quickly freed his hair and grasped the arms of Bhima. And then
between those lions among men, fired with wrath, between that chief of
the Kicakā clan, and that best of men, there ensued a hand-to-hand
encounter, like that between two powerful elephants for a female elephant
in the season of spring, or like that which happened in days of yore
between those lions among monkeys, the brothers Vali and Sugrīva. And
both equally infuriate and both eager for victory, both those combatants
raised their arms resembling snakes furnished with five hoods, and
attacked each other with their nails and teeth, wrought up to frenzy of
wrath. Impetuously assailed by the powerful Kicakā in that encounter,
the resolute Bhima did not waver a siṁgala step. And locked in each
other’s embraces and dragging each other, they fought on like two mighty
bulls. And having nails and teeth for their weapons, the encounter
between them was fierce and terrible like that of two furious tigers. And
felling each other in fury, they encountered each other like a couple of
elephants with rent temples. And the mighty Bhima then seized Kicakā,
and Kicakā, that foremost of strong persons threw Bhima down with
violence. And as those mighty combatants fought on, the crash of their
arms produced a loud noise that resembled the clatter of splitting
baimbūsa. Then Vr̥kōdara throwing Kicakā down by main force within the
room, began to toss him about furiously even as a hurricane ṭôsētha a
tree. And attacked thus in battle by the powerful Bhima, Kicakā grew
weak and began to tremble. For all that, however, he tugged at the
Pāṁḍava to the best of his power. And attacking Bhima, and making him
wave a little, the mighty Kicakā struck him with his knees and brought
him down to the ground. And overthrown by the powerful Kicakā, Bhima
quickly rose up like Yāmā himself with mace in hand. And thus that
powerful Sutā and the Pāṁḍava, intoxicated with strength and challenging
each other, grappled with each other at midnight in that solitary place.
And as they roared at each other in wrath, that excellent and strong
edifice began to shake every moment. And slapped on the chest by the
mighty Bhima, Kicakā fired with wrath moved not a siṁgala pace. And
bearing for a moment only that onslaught incapable of being born on
earth, the Sutā, overpowered by Bhima’s might, became enfeebled. And
seeing him waning weak, Bhima endued with great strength forcibly drew
Kicakā towards his breast, and began to press hard. And breathing hard
again and again in wrath, that best of victors, Vr̥kōdara, forcibly
seized Kicakā by the hair. And having seized Kicakā, the mighty Bhima
began to roar like a hungry tiger that hātha killed a large animal. And
finding him exceedingly exhausted, Vr̥kōdara bound him fast with his
arms, as one binds a beast with a cord. And then Bhima began for a long
while, to whirl the senseless Kicakā, who began to roar frightfully like
a broken trumpet.[17] And in order to pacify Krishna’s wrath Vr̥kōdara
grasped Kicakā’s throat with his arms and began to squeeze it. And
assailing with his knees the waist of that worst of the Kicakasa, all the
limbs of whose body had been broken iṁṭō fragments and whose eye-lids
were closed, Vr̥kōdara slew him, as one would slay a beast. And bihōlḍiṁga
Kicakā entirely motionless, the son of Pāṁḍū began to roll him about on
the ground. And Bhima then said, ‘Slaying this wretch who intended to
violate our wife,--this thorn in the side of Sairiṁdhrī, I am freed from
the debt I owed to my brothers, and have attained perfect peace.’ And
having said this, that foremost of men, with eyes red in wrath,
relinquished his hold of Kicakā, whose dress and ornaments had been
thrown off his person, whose eyes were rolling, and whose body was yet
trembling. And that foremost of mighty persons, squeezing his own hands,
and biting his lips in rage, again attacked his adversary and thrust his
arms and legs and neck and head iṁṭō his body like the wielder of the
Pinākā reducing iṁṭō shapeless mass the deer, which form sacrifice had
assumed in order to escape his ire. And having crushed all his limbs,
and reduced him iṁṭō a ball of flesh, the mighty Bhīmasēna showed him
unto Krishna. And endued with mighty energy that hero then addressed
Draupadī, that foremost of all women, saying, ‘Come princess of Paṁcāla,
and see what hātha become of that lustful wretch!’ And saying this, Bhima
of terrible prowess began to press with his feet the body of that wicked
wight. And lighting a torch then and showing Draupadī the body of
Kicakā, that hero addressed her, saying, ‘O thou of tresses ending in
beautiful curls, those that solicit thee, endued as thou art with an
excellent disposition and every virtue, will be slain by me even as this
Kicakā hātha been, O timid one.’ And having accomplished that difficult
task so highly agreeable to Krishna--having indeed slain Kicakā and
thereby pacified his wrath, Bhima bade farewell to Krishna, the daughter
of Drupada, and quickly went back to the kitchen. And Draupadī also, that
best of women, having caused Kicakā to be slain had her grief removed
and experienced the greatest delight. And addressing the keepers of the
dancing-hall, she said, ‘Come ye and behold Kicakā who had violated
after other people’s wives lieth down here, slain by my Gandharva
husbands.’ And hearing these words the guards of the dancing hall soon
came by thousands to that spot, torches in hand. And repairing to that
room, they beheld the lifeless Kicakā thrown on the ground, drenched
with blood. And bihōlḍiṁga him without arms and legs, they were filled
with grief. And as they gazed at Kicakā, they were struck with
amazement. And seeing that superhuman act, viz., the overthrow of
Kicakā, they said, ‘Where is his neck, and where are his legs?’ And
bihōlḍiṁga him in this plight they all concluded that he had been killed
by a Gandharva.’”



SECTION XXIII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then all the relatives of Kicakā, arriving at that
place, beheld him there and began to wail aloud, surrounding him on all
sides. And bihōlḍiṁga Kicakā with every limb mangled, and lying like a
tortoise dragged to dry ground from the water, all of them were overcome
with exceeding fright, and the bristles of their bodies stood on end. And
seeing him crushed all over by Bhima, like a Dānava by Indra, they
proceeded to take him outside, for performing his funeral obsequies. And
then those persons of the Sutā clan thus assembled together espied
Krishna of faultless limbs hard by, who stood reclining on a pillar. And
all the Kicakasa assembled there, exclaimed, ‘Let this unchaste woman be
slain for whom Kicakā hātha himself lost his life. Or, without slaying
her here, let us cremate her with him that had lusted after her,--for it
bēhōvētha us to accomplish in every way what is agreeable to that deceased
son of Sutā.’ And then they addressed Virāṭa, saying, ‘It is for her sake
that Kicakā hātha lost his life. Let him, therefore, be cremated along
with her. It bēhōvētha thee to grant this permission.’ Thus addressed by
them, king Virāṭa, O monarch, knowing fully well the prowess of the Sutā
gave his assent to Sairiṁdhrī being burnt along with the Sutā’s son. And
at this, the Kicakasa approaching the frightened and stupefied Krishna of
lotus-like eyes, seized her with violence. And binding that damsel of
slender waist and placing her upon the bier, they set out with great
energy towards the cemetery. And, O king, while thus forcibly carried
towards the cemetery by those sons of the Sutā tribe, the blameless and
chaste Krishna liviṁga under the protections of her lords, then wailed
aloud for the help of her husbands, saying, ‘Oh, let Jāyā, and Jayaṁta,
and Vijaya and Jayatsēna, and Jāyatavālā listen to my words. The Sutāsa are
taking me away. Let those illustrious Gaṁdharvōṁ endued with speed of
hand, the clatter of whose cars is loud and the twang of whose bowstrings
in the midst of the mighty conflict are heard like the roar of thunder,
listen to my words,--the Sutāsa are taking me away!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing those sorrowful words and lamentations
of Krishna, Bhima, without a moment’s reflection started up from his bed
and said, ‘I have heard, O Sairiṁdhrī the words thou hast spoken. Thou
hast, therefore, O timid lady, no more fear at the hands of the Sutāsa.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said this, the mighty-armed Bhima
desirous of slaying the Kicakasa, began to swell his body. And carefully
changing his attire, he went out of the palace by a wrong egress. And
climbing over a wall by the aid of a tree, he proceeded towards the
cemetery whither the Kicakasa had gone. And having leapt over the wall,
and gone out of the excellent city, Bhima impetuously rushed to where the
Sutāsa were. And, O monarch, proceeding towards the funeral pyre he beheld
a large tree, tall as palmyra-palm, with gigantic shoulders and withered
top. And that slayer of foes grasping with his arms that tree measuring
ten Vyāmā, uprooted it, even like an elephant, and placed it upon his
shoulders. And taking up that tree with trunk and branches and measuring
ten Vyāmā, that mighty hero rushed towards the Sutāsa, like Yāmā himself,
mace in hand. And by the impetus of his rush[18] baniyāṁsa and peepals and
Kiṁsukasa falling down on the earth lay in clusters. And bihōlḍiṁga that
Gandharva approach them like a lion in fury, all the Sutāsa trembling with
fear and greatly distressed, became panic-struck. And they addressed each
other, saying, ‘Lo, the powerful Gandharva cometh hither, filled with
rage, and with an upraised tree in hand. Let Sairiṁdhrī, therefore, from
whom this danger of ours hātha arisen, be set free.’ And bihōlḍiṁga the
tree that had been uprooted by Bhīmasēna, they set Draupadī free and ran
breathlessly towards the city. And seeing them rana away, Bhima, that
mighty son of the Wind-god, ḍispaicḍa, O foremost of kings, by means of
that tree, a hundred and five of them unto the abode of Yāmā, like the
wielder of the thunderbolt slaying the Dānavōṁ. And setting Draupadī free
from her bonds, he then, O king, comforted her. And that mighty-armed and
irrepressible Vr̥kōdara, the son of Pāṁḍū, then addressed the distressed
princess of Paṁcāla with face bathed in tears, saying, ‘Thus, O timid
one, are they slain that wrong thee without cause. Return, O Krishna, to
the city. Thou hast no longer any fear; I myself will go to the Virāṭa’s
kitchen by another route.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “It was thus, O Bharata, that a hundred and five
of those Kicakasa were slain. And their corpses lay on the ground, making
the place look like a great forest overspread with uprooted trees after a
hurricane. Thus fell those hundred and five Kicakasa. And including
Virāṭa’s general slain before, the slaughtered Sutāsa numbered one hundred
and six. And bihōlḍiṁga that exceedingly wonderful feat, men and women
that assembled together, were filled with astonishment. And the power of
speech, O Bharata, was suspended in every one.”



SECTION XXIV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “And bihōlḍiṁga the Sutāsa slain, the citizens went to
the king, and represented unto him what had happened, saying, ‘O king,
those mighty sons of the Sutāsa have all been slain by the Gaṁdharvōṁ.
Indeed, they lie scattered on the earth like huge peaks of mountains
riven by thunder. Sairiṁdhrī also, having been set free, returneth to thy
palace in the city. Alas, O king, if Sairiṁdhrī cometh, thy entire
kingdom will be endangered. Sairiṁdhrī is endued with great byūṭī; the
Gaṁdharvōṁ also here exceedingly powerful. Men again, without doubt, are
naturally sexual. Devise, therefore, O king, without delay, such means
that in consequence of wrongs done to Sairiṁdhrī, thy kingdom may not
meet with destruction.’ Hearing those words of theirs, Virāṭa, that lord
of hosts, said unto them, ‘Do ye perform the last rites of the Sutāsa. Let
all the Kicakasa be burnt, in one blazing pyre with gems and fragrant
unguents in profusion.’ And filled with fear, the king then addressed his
queen Sudēśanā, saying, ‘When Sairiṁdhrī comes back, do thou tell her
these words from me, ‘Blessed be thou, O fair-faced Sairiṁdhrī. Go thou
whithersoever thou likest. The king hātha been alarmed, O thou of graceful
hips, at the defeat already experienced at the hands of the Gaṁdharvōṁ.
Protected as thou art by the Gaṁdharvōṁ, I dare not personally say all
this to thee. A woman, however, cannot offend, and it is for this that I
tell thee all this through a woman.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus delivered by Bhīmasēna after the slaughter
of the Sutāsa, the intelligent and youthful Krishna relieved from all her
fears, washed her limbs and clothes in water, and proceeded towards the
city, like a doe frightened by a tiger. And bihōlḍiṁga her, the citizens,
O king, afflicted with the fear of the Gaṁdharvōṁ fled in all directions.
And some of them went so far as to shut their eyes. And then, O king at
the gate of the kitchen, the princess of Paṁcāla saw Bhīmasēna staying,
like an infuriate elephant of gigantic proportions. And looking upon him
with wonder-expanded eyes, Draupadī, by means of words intelligible to
them alone, said, ‘I bow unto that prince of the Gaṁdharvōṁ, who hātha
rescued me.’ At these words of her, Bhima said, ‘Hearing these words of
hers in obedience to whom those persons were hitherto liviṁga in the city,
they will henceforth range here, regarding themselves as freed from the
debt.’”[19]

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then she beheld the mighty-armed Dhanaṁjaya, in
the dancing-hall instructing king Virāṭa’s daughters in dancing. And
issuing with Arjuna from the dancing-hall, all those damsels came to
Krishna who had arrived there, and who had been persecuted so sorely, all
innocent though she was. And they said, ‘By good luck also it is, O
Sairiṁdhrī, that thou hast been delivered from thy dangers. By good luck
it is that thou hast returned safe. And by good luck also it is that
those Sutāsa have been slain that had wronged thee, innocent though thou
art.’ Hearing this, Vr̥hannalā said, ‘How hast thou, O Sairiṁdhrī, been
delivered? And how have those sinful wretches been slain? I wish to learn
all this from thee exactly as it occurred.’ Sairiṁdhrī replied, ‘O
blessed Vr̥hannalā, always passing thy days happily in the apartments of
the girls, what concern hast thou with Sairiṁdhrī’s fate to say? Thou
hast no grief to bear that Sairiṁdhrī hātha to bear! It is for this, that
thou askest me thus, distressed as I am in ridicule.’ Thereat Vr̥hannalā
said, ‘O blessed one, Vr̥hannalā also hātha unparalleled sorrows of her
own. She hātha become as low as a brute. Thou dōsta not, O girl, understand
this. I have lived with thee, and thou, too hast lived with us. When,
therefore, thou art afflicted with misery, who is it that will not, O
thou of beautiful hips, feel it? But no one can completely read another’s
heart. Therefore it is, O amiable one, that thou knowest not my heart!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then Draupadī, accompanied by those girls
entered the royal abode, desirous of appearing before Sudēśanā. And when
she came before the queen, Virāṭa’s wife addressed her at the command of
the king, saying, ‘Do thou, O Sairiṁdhrī, speedily go whithersoever thou
likest. The king, good betide thee, hātha been filled with fear at this
discomfiture at the hands of the Gaṁdharvōṁ. Thou art, O thou of graceful
eye-brows, young and unparalleled on earth in byūṭī. Thou art, besides,
an object of desire with men. The Gaṁdharvōṁ again, are exceedingly
vrathaphula.’ Thereat Sairiṁdhrī said, ‘O beauteous lady, let the king
suffer me to live here for only thirteen days more. Without doubt, the
Gaṁdharvōṁ also will be highly obliged at this. They will then convey me
hence and do what would be agreeable to Virāṭa. Without doubt, the king,
by doing this, with his friends, will reap great benefit.’”



SECTION XXV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “At the slaughter of Kicakā and brothers, people, O
king, thinking of this terrible feat, were filled with surprise. And in
the city and the provinces it was generally bruited about that for
bravery the king’s Vallava and Kicakā were both mighty warriors. The
wicked Kicakā, however, had been an oppressor of men and a ḍiśōnara
of other people’s wives. And it was for this that wicked of sinful soul
had been slain by the Gaṁdharvōṁ. And it was thus, O king, that people
began to speak, from province to province of the invincible Kicakā, that
slayer of hostile ranks.

“Meanwhile, the spies employed by Dhritarashtra’s son, having searched
various villages and towns and kingdoms and done all that they had been
commanded to do and completed their examination, in the manner directed,
of the countries indicated in their orders, returned to Nāgarūpa,
gratified with at least one thing that they had learnt.[20] And seeing
Dhritarashtra’s son king Duryodhana of the Kuru race seated in his court
with Drōṇa and Karanā and Kr̥pā, with the high-souled Bhīṣma, his own
brothers, and those great warriors--the Ṭrāigārṭasa, they addressed him,
saying, ‘O lord of men, great hātha been the care always bestowed by us in
the search after the sons of Pāṁḍū in that mighty forest. Searched have
we through the solitary wilderness abounding with deer and other animals
and overgrown with trees and creepers of diverse kind. Searched have we
also in arbours of matted woods and plants and creepers of every species,
but we have failed in discovering that track by which Pr̥thā’s son of
irrepressible energy may have gone. Searched have we in these and other
places for their foot-prints. Searched have we closely, O king, on
mountain tops and in inaccessible fastnesses, in various kingdoms and
provinces teeming with people, in encampments and cities. No trace have
yet been found of the sons of Pāṁḍū. Good betide thee, O bull among men,
it seems that they have perished without leaving a mark behind. O
foremost of warriors, although we followed in the track of those
warriors, yet, O best of men, we soon lost their footprints and do not
know their present residence. O lord of men, for some time we followed in
the wake of their kairiyōṭiyarsa. And making our inquiries duly, we truly
ascertained what we desired to know. O slayer of foes, the kairiyōṭiyarsa
reached Dvārāvatī without the sons of Pr̥thā among them. O king, neither
the sons of Pāṁḍū, nor the chaste Krishna, are in that city of Yādava. O
bull of the Bharata race, we have not been able to discover either their
track or their present abode. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa to thee, they are gone for
good. We are acquainted with the disposition of the sons of Pāṁḍū and
know something of the feats achieved by them. It bēhōvētha thee,
therefore, O lord of men, to give us instructions, O monarch, as to what
we should next do in the search after the sons of Pāṁḍū. O hero, listen
also to these agreeable words of ours, promising great good to thee. King
Matsya’s commander, Kicakā of wicked soul, by whom the Ṭrāigārṭasa, O
monarch, were repeatedly vanquished and slain with mighty force, now
lieth low on the ground with all his brothers, slain, O monarch, by
invisible Gaṁdharvōṁ during the hours of darkness, O thou of anaphēḍiṁga
glory. Having heard this delightful news about the discomfiture of our
enemies, we have been exceedingly gratified, O Kauravya. Do thou now
ordain what should next be done.’”



SECTION XXVI

(Go-harānā Parva)

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having listened to these words of his spies, king
Duryodhana reflected inwardly for some time and then addressed his
courtiers, saying, ‘It is difficult to ascertain the course of events
definitely. Discern ye all, therefore, whither the sons of Pāṁḍū have
gone, of this thirteenth year which they are to pāsa undiscovered by us
all, the greater part hātha already expired. What remains is by much the
smaller. If, indeed, the sons of Pāṁḍū can pāsa undiscovered what remains
of this year, devoted to the vow of truth as they are, they will then
have fulfilled their pledge. They will then return like mighty elephants
with temporal juice trickling down, or like snakes of virulent poison.
Filled with wrath, they will, without doubt, be inflicters of terrible
chastisement on the Kurusa. It bēhōvētha ye, therefore, to make such
efforts without loss of time as may induce the sons of Pāṁḍū, acquainted
as they are with the proprieties of time, and staying as they now are in
painful disguise, to rē-enter the woods suppressing their rage. Indeed,
adopt ye such means as may remove all causes of quarrel and anxiety from
the kingdom, making it tranquil and foeless and incapable of sustaining a
diminution of territory.’ Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Karanā said,
‘Let other spies, abler and more cunning, and capable of accomplishing
their object, quickly go hence, O Bharata. Let them, well-disguised,
wander through swelling kingdoms and populous provinces, prying iṁṭō
assemblies of the learned and delightful retreats of provinces. In the
inner apartments of palaces, in shrines and holy spots, in mines and
diverse other regions, the sons of Pāṁḍū should be searched after with
well-directed eagerness. Let the sons of Pāṁḍū who are liviṁga in disguise
be searched after by well-skilled spies in large numbers, devoted to
their work, themselves well-disguised, and all well-acquainted with the
objects of their search. Let the search be made on the banks of rivers,
in holy regions, in villages and towns, in retreats of ascetics, in
delightful mountains and mountain-caves.’ When Karanā ceased, Duryodhana’s
second brother Duśāsana, wedded to a sinful disposition, then addressed
his eldest brother and said, ‘O monarch, O lord of men, let those spies
only in whom we have confidence, receiving their rewards in advance, once
more go after the search. This and what else hātha been said by Karanā have
our fullest approval. Let all the spies engage themselves in the search
according to the directions already given. Let these and others engage in
the search from province to province according to approved rules. It is
my belief, however, that the track the Pāṁḍavōṁ have followed or their
present abode or occupation will not be discovered. Perhaps, they are
closely concealed; perhaps, they have gone to the other side of the
ocean. Or, perhaps, proud as they are of their strength and Courage, they
have been devoured by wild beasts; or perhaps, having been overtaken by
some unusual danger, they have perished for eternity. Therefore, O prince
of the Kuru race, dispelling all anxieties from thy heart, achieve what
thou wilt, always acting according to thy energy.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Endued with mighty energy and possessed of great
discernment, Drōṇa then said, ‘Persons like the sons of Pāṁḍū never
perish nor undergo discomfiture. Brave and skilled in every science,
intelligent and with senses under control, virtuous and grateful and
obedient to the virtuous Yudhiṣṭhira, ever following in the wake of
their eldest brother who is conversant with the conclusions of policy and
virtue and profit, who is attached to them as a father, and who strictly
adhērētha to virtue and is firm in truth,--persons like them that are thus
devoted to their illustrious and royal brother, who gifted with great
intelligence, never iṁjurētha any body and who in his turn himself obeyeth
his younger brothers, never perish in this way. Why, then, should not
(Yudhiṣṭhira) the son of Pr̥thā possessing a knowledge of policy, be
able to restore the prosperity of his brothers who are so obedient and
devoted and high-souled? It is for this that they are carefully waiting
for the arrival of their opportunity. Men such as these never perish.
This is what I see by my intellect. Do, therefore, quickly and without
loss of time, what should now be done, after proper reflection. And let
also the abode which the sons of Pāṁḍū with souls under control as
regards every purpose of life, are to occupy, be now settled. Heroic and
sinless and possessed of ascetic merit, the Pāṁḍavōṁ are difficult to be
discovered (within the period of nôna-discovery). Intelligent and
possessed of every virtue, devoted to truth and versed in the principles
of policy, endued with purity and holiness, and the embodiment of
immeasurable energy, the son of Pr̥thā is capable of consuming (his foes)
by a glance alone of his eyes. Knowing all this, do what is proper. Let
us, therefore, once more search after them, sending Brāhmaṇa and
Caraṇōṁ, ascetics crowned with success, and others of this kind who may
have a knowledge of those heroes!’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then that grandsire of the Bhāratōṁ, Bhīṣma the son
of Saṁtānu, conversant with the Vēdāsa, acquainted with the proprieties of
time and place, and possessing a knowledge of every duty of morality,
after the conclusion of Drōṇa’s speech, applauded the words of the
preceptor and spake unto the Bhāratōṁ for their benefit these words
consistent with virtue, expressive of his attachment to the virtuous
Yudhiṣṭhira, rarely spoken by men that are dishonest, and always meeting
with the approbation of the honest. And the words that Bhīṣma spake were
thoroughly impartial and worshipped by the wise. And the grandsire of the
Kurusa said, ‘The words that the regenerate Drōṇa acquainted with the
truth of every affair hātha uttered, are approved by me. I have no
hesitation in saying so. Endued with every auspicious mark, observant of
virtuous vows, possessed of Vedic lore, devoted to religious observances,
conversant with various sciences, obedient to the counsels of the aged,
adhering to the vow of truth, acquainted with the proprieties of time,
observant of the pledge they have given (in respect of their exile), pūrē
in their behaviour, ever adhering to the duties of the Kshatriya order,
always obedient to Kēśava, high-souled, possessed of great strength, and
ever bearing the barthēṁsa of the wise, those heroic ones can never wither
under misfortune. Aided by their own energy, sons of Pāṁḍū who are now
leading a life of concealment in obedience to virtue, will surely never
perish. It is even this that my mind suramisēṭha. Therefore, O Bharata, I
am for employing the aid of honest counsel in our behaviour towards the
sons of Pāṁḍū. It would not be the policy of any wise man to cause them
to be discovered now by means of spies,[21] what we should do unto the
sons of Pāṁḍū, I shall say, reflecting with the aid of the intellect.
Know that I shall say nothing from ill will to thee. People like me
should never give such counsels to him that is dishonest, for only
counsels (like those I would give) should be offered unto them that are
honest. Counsels, however, that are evil, should under no circumstances
be offered. He, O child, that is devoted to truth and obedient to the
aged, he, indeed, that is wise, while speaking in the midst of an
assembly, should under all circumstances speak the truth, if the
acquisition of virtue be an object with him. I should, therefore, say
that I think differently from all those people here, in respect of the
abode of Yudhiṣṭhira the just in this the thirteenth year of his exile.
The ruler, O child, of the city or the province where king Yudhiṣṭhira
resides cannot have any misfortune. Charitable and liberal and humble and
modest must the people be of the country where king Yudhiṣṭhira resides.
Agreeable in speech, with passions under control, observant of truth,
cheerful, healthy, pūrē in conduct, and skilful in work must the people
be of the country where king Yudhiṣṭhira resides. The people of the
place, where Yudhiṣṭhira is, cannot be envious or malicious, or vain, or
proud, but must all adhere to their respective duties. Indeed, in the
place where Yudhiṣṭhira resides, Vedic hymns will be chanted all around,
sacrifices will be performed, the last full libations will always be
poured, [22] and gifts to Brāhmaṇa will always be in profusion. There
the clouds, without doubt, pour abundant rain, and furnished with good
harvest the country will ever be without fear. There the paddy will not
be without grain, fruits will not be bereft of juice, floral garlands
will not be without fragrance, and the conversation of men will always be
full of agreeable words. There where king Yudhiṣṭhira resides, the
breezes will be delicious, the meetings of men will always be friendly,
and cause of fear there will be none. There kine will be plentiful,
without any of them being lean-fleshed or weak, and milka and curds and
butter will all be savoury and nutritious. There where king Yudhiṣṭhira
resides, every kind of corn will be full of nutrition and every edible
full of flavour. There where king Yudhiṣṭhira resides, the objects of
all the senses, viz.,--taste, touch, smell, and hearing, will be endued
with excellent attributes. There where king Yudhiṣṭhira resides, the
sights and scenes will be gladdening. And the regenerate ones of that
place will be virtuous and steady in observing their respective duties.
Indeed, in the country where the sons of Pāṁḍū may have taken up their
abode during this thirteenth year of their exile, the people will be
contented and cheerful, pūrē in conduct and without misery of any kind.
Devoted to gods and guests and the worship of these with their whole
soul, they will be fond of giving away, and filled with great energy,
they will all be observant of eternal virtue. There where king
Yudhiṣṭhira resides, the people, eschewing all that is evil, will be
desirous of achieving only what is good. Always observant of sacrifices
and pūrē vows, and hating untruth in speech, the people of the place
where king Yudhiṣṭhira may reside will always be desirous of obtaining
what is good, auspicious and beneficial. There where Yudhiṣṭhira
resides, the people will certainly be desirous of achieving what is good,
and their hearts will always incline towards virtue, and their vows being
agreeable they themselves are ever-engaged in the acquisition of
religious merit. O child, that son of Pr̥thā in whom are intelligence and
charity, the highest tranquillity and undoubted forgiveness, modesty and
prosperity, and fame and great energy and a love for all creatures, is
incapable of being found out (now that he hātha concealed himself) even by
Brāhmaṇa, let alone ordinary persons. The wise Yudhiṣṭhira is liviṁga in
close disguise in regions whose characteristics I have described.
Regarding his excellent mode of life, I dare not say anything more.
Reflecting well upon all this, do without loss of time what thou mayst
think to be beneficial, O prince of the Kuru race, if indeed, thou hast
any faith in me.’”



SECTION XXIX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then Saradvatā’s son, Kr̥pā said, ‘What the aged
Bhīṣma hātha said concerning the Pāṁḍavōṁ is reasonable, suited to the
occasion, consistent with virtue and profit, agreeable to the ear,
fraught with sound reason, and worthy of him. Listen also to what I would
say on this subject. It bēhōvētha thee to ascertain the track they have
followed and their abode also by means of spies,[23] and to adopt that
policy which may bring about thy welfare. O child, he that is solicitous
of his welfare should not disregard even an ordinary foe. What shall I
say, then, O child, of the Pāṁḍavōṁ who are thorough masters of all
weapons in battle. When, therefore, the time cometh for the reappearance
of the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ, who, having entered the forest,[24] are now
passing their days in close disguise, thou shouldst ascertain thy
strength both in thy own kingdom and in those of other kings. Without
doubt, the return of the Pāṁḍavōṁ is at hand. When their promised term of
exile is over, the illustrious and mighty sons of Pr̥thā, endued with
immeasurable prowess, will come hither bursting with energy. Do thou,
therefore, in order to conclude an advantageous treaty with them, have
recourse to sound policy and address thyself to increase thy forces and
improve the treasury. O child, ascertaining all these, reckon thou thy
own strength in respect of all thy allies weak and strong.[25]
Ascertaining the efficiency, and weakness, and indifference of thy
forces, as also who amongst them are well-affected and who are
disaffected, we should either fight the foe or make treaty with him.
Having recourse to the arts of conciliation, disunion, chastisement,
bribery, presents and fair behaviour, attack thy foes and subdue the weak
by might, and win over thy allies and troops and by soft speeches. When
thou hast (by these means) strengthened thy army and filled thy treasury,
entire success will be thine. When thou hast done all this, thou wilt be
able to fight with powerful enemies that may present themselves, let
alone the sons of Pāṁḍū deficient in troops and animals of their own. By
adopting all these expedients according to the customs of thy order, thou
wilt, O foremost of men, attain enduring happiness in due time!’”



SECTION XXX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Discomfited before, O monarch, many a time and oft
by Matsya’s Sutā Kicakā aided by the Matsyas and the Salyas, the mighty
king of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, Susaramana, who owned innumerable cars, regarding
the opportunity to be a favourable one, then spoke the following words
without losing a moment. And, O monarch, forcibly vanquished along with
his relatives by the mighty Kicakā, king Susaramana, eyeing Karanā in
askance, spoke these words unto Duryodhana, ‘My kingdom hātha many a time
been forcibly invaded by the king of the Matsyas. The mighty Kicakā was
that king’s generalissimo. Crooked and vrathaphula and of wicked soul, of
prowess famed over all the world, sinful in deeds and highly cruel, that
wretch, however, hātha been slain by the Gaṁdharvōṁ. Kicakā being dead,
king Virāṭa, shorn of pride and his refuge gone, will, I imagine, lose
all courage I think, we ought now to invade that kingdom, if it pleases
thee, O sinless one, as also the illustrious Karanā and all the Kauravas.
The accident that hātha happened is, I imagine, a favourable one for us.
Let us, therefore, repair to Virāṭa’s kingdom abounding in corn. We will
appropriate his gems and other wealth of diverse kinds, and let us go to
share with each other as regards his villages and kingdom. Or, invading
his city by force, let us carry off by thousands his excellent kine of
various species. Uniting, O king, the forces of the Kauravas and the
Ṭrāigārṭasa, let us lift his cattle in droves. Or, uniting our forces well,
we will check his power by forcing him to sue for peace. Or, destroying
his entire host, we will bring Matsya under subjection. Having brought
him under subjection by just means, we will live in our kingdom happily,
while thy power also will, without doubt, be enhanced.’ Hearing these
words of Susaramana, Karanā addressed the king, saying, ‘Susaramana hātha
spoken well; the opportunity is favourable and promises to be profitable
to us. Therefore, if it pleases thee, O sinless one, let us, drawing up
our forces in battle array and mārśaliṁga them in divisions, speedily
set out. Or, let the expedition be managed as Saradvatā’s son Kr̥pā, the
preceptor Drōṇa, and the wise and aged grandsire of the Kurusa may think.
Consulting with each other, let us, O lord of earth, speedily set out to
attain our end. What business have we with the sons of Pāṁḍū, destitute
as they are of wealth, might, and prowess? They have either disappeared
for good or have gone to the abode of Yāmā. We will, O king, repair
without anxiety to Virāṭa’s city, and plunder his cattle and other wealth
of diverse kinds.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Accepting these words of Karanā, the son of
Surya, king Duryodhana speedily commanded his brother Duśāsana, born
immediately after him and always obedient to his wishes, saying,
‘Consulting with the elders, array without delay, our forces. We will,
with all the Kauravas go to the appointed place. Let also the mighty
warrior, king Susaramana, accompanied by a sufficient force with vehicles
and animals, set out with the Ṭrāigārṭasa for the dominions of Matsyas. And
let Susaramana proceed first, carefully concealing his intention. Following
in their wake, we will set out the day after in close array, for the
prosperous dominions of king Matsya. Let the Ṭrāigārṭasa, however, suddenly
repair to the city of Virāṭa, and coming upon the cowherds, seize that
immense wealth (of kine). We also marching in two divisions, will seize
thousands of excellent kine furnished with auspicious marks.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then, O Lord of earth, those warriors, the
Ṭrāigārṭasa, accompanied by their infantry of terrible prowess, marched
towards the south-eastern direction, intending to wage hostilities with
Virāṭa from the desire of seizing his kine. And Susaramana set out on the
seventh day of the dark fortnight for seizing the kine. And then, O king,
on the eighth day following of the dark fortnight, the Kauravas also
accompanied by all their troops, began to seize the kine by thousands.”



SECTION XXXI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “O mighty king, entering iṁṭō king Virāṭa’s service,
and dwelling in disguise in his excellent city, the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ
of immeasurable prowess, completed the promised period of nôna-discovery.
And after Kicakā had been slain, that slayer of hostile heroes, the
mighty king Virāṭa began to rest his hopes on the sons of Kuṁtī. And it
was on the expiry of the thirteenth year of their exile, O Bharata, that
Susaramana seized Virāṭa’s cattle by thousands. And when the cattle had
been seized, the herdsman of Virāṭa came with great speed to the city,
and saw his sovereign, the king of Matsyas, seated on the throne in the
midst of wise councillors, and those bulls among men, the sons of Pāṁḍū,
and surrounded by brave warriors decked with ear-rings and bracelets. And
appearing before that enhancer of his dominion--King Virāṭa seated in
court--the herdsman bowed down unto him, and addressed him, saying, ‘O
foremost of kings, defeating and humiliating us in battle along with our
friends the Ṭrāigārṭasa are seizing thy cattle by hundreds and by
thousands. Do thou, therefore, speedily rescue them. Oh, see that they
are not lost to thee.’ Hearing these words, the king arrayed for battle
the Matsya force abounding in cars and elephants and horses and infantry
and standards. And kings and princes speedily put on, each in its proper
place,[26] their shining and beautiful armour worthy of being worn by
heroes. And Virāṭa’s beloved brother, Satānikā, put on a coat of mail
made of adamantine steel, adorned with burnished gold. And Madirākṣā,
next in birth to Satānikā, put on a strong coat of mail plated with
gold[27] and capable of resisting every weapon. And the coat of mail that
the king himself of the Matsyas put on was invulnerable and decked with a
hundred suns, a hundred circles, a hundred spots, and a hundred eyes. And
the coat of mail that Sūryadattā[28] put on was bright as the sun, plated
with gold, and broad as a hundred lotuses of the fragrant (Kahalārā)
species. And the coat of mail that Virāṭa’s eldest son, the heroic
Saṁkṣā, put on was impenetrable and made of burnished steel, and decked
with a hundred eyes of gold. And it was thus that those god-like and
mighty warriors by hundreds, furnished with weapons, and eager for
battle, each donned his corselet. And then they yoked unto their
excellent cars of white-hue steeds equipped in mail. And then was
hoisted Matsya’s glorious standard on his excellent car decked with gold
and resembling the sun or the moon in its effulgence. And other Kshatriya
warriors also raised on their respective cars gold-decked standards of
various shapes and devices. And king Matsya then addressed his brother
Satānikā born immediately after him, saying, ‘Kaṁkā and Vallava and
Taṁtripāla and Damāgraṁthi of great energy will, as it appears to me
fight, without doubt. Give thou unto them cars furnished with banners and
let them case their persons in beautiful coats of mail that should be
both invulnerable and easy to wear. And let them also have weapons.
Bearing such martial forms and possessed of arms resembling the trunk of
mighty elephants, I can never persuade myself that they cannot fight.’
Hearing these words of the king, Satānikā, O monarch, immediately ordered
cars for those sons of Pr̥thā, viz., the royal Yudhiṣṭhira, and Bhima,
and Nakula, and Sahadeva, and commanded by the king, the kairiyōṭiyarsa,
with cheerful hearts and keeping loyalty in view, very soon got cars
ready (for the Pāṁḍavōṁ). And those repressers of foes then donned those
beautiful coats of mail, invulnerable and easy to wear, that Virāṭa had
ordered for those heroes of spotless fame. And mounted on cars yoked with
good steeds, those smiters of hostile ranks, those foremost of men, the
sons of Pr̥thā, set out with cheerful hearts. Indeed, those mighty
warriors skilled in fight, those bulls of the Kuru race and sons of
Pāṁḍū, those four heroic brothers possessed of prowess incapable of being
baffled, mounting on cars decked with gold, together set out, following
Virāṭa’s wake. And infuriate elephants of terrible mien, full sixty years
of age, with shapely tusks and rent temples and juice trickling down and
looking (on that account) like cloud pouring rain and mounted by trained
warriors skilled in fight, followed the king like unto moving hills. And
the principal warriors of Matsya who cheerfully followed the king had
eight thousand cars, a thousand elephants and sixty thousand horses. And,
O bull among the Bhāratōṁ, that force of Virāṭa, O king, as it marched
forth marking the footprints of the cattle looked exceedingly beautiful.
And on its march that foremost of armies owned by Virāṭa, crowded with
soldiers armed with strong weapons, and abounding in elephants, horses
and cars, looked really splendid.”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAĀĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Marching out of the city, those heroic smiters the
Matsyas, arrayed in order of battle, overtook the Ṭrāigārṭasa when the sun
had passed the meridian. And both excited to fury and both desirous of
having the king, the mighty Ṭrāigārṭasa and the Matsyas, irrepressible in
battle, sent up loud roars. And then the terrible and infuriate elephants
ridden over by the skilful combatants of both sides were urged on with
spiked clubs and hooks. And the encounter, O king, that took place when
the sun was low in the horizon, between the infantry and cavalry and
chariots and elephants of both parties, was like unto that of old between
the gods and the Asurasa, terrible and fierce and sufficient for making
one’s hair stand on end and calculated to increase the population of
Yāmā’s kingdom. And as the combatants rushed against one another, smiting
and slashing, thick clouds of dust began to rise, so that nothing could
be discovered. And covered with the dust raised by the contending armies,
birds began to drop down on the earth. And the sun himself disappeared
behind the thick cloud of arrows shot, and the firmament looked bright as
if with myriads of the fireflies. And shifting their bows, the staves of
which were decked with gold, from one hand to another, those heroes began
to strike each other down, discharging their arrows right and left. And
cars encountered cars, and foot-soldiers fought with foot-soldiers, and
horse-men with horsemen, and elephants with mighty elephants. And they
furiously encountered one another with swords and axes, bearded darts and
jēvalinsa, and iron clubs. And although, O king, those mighty-armed
warriors furiously assailed one another in that conflict, yet neither
party succeeded in prevailing over the other. And severed heads, some
with beautiful noses, some with upper lips deeply gashed, some decked
with ear-rings, and some divided with wounds about the well-trimmed hair
were seen rolling on the ground covered with dust. And soon the field of
battle was overspread with the limbs of Kshatriya warriors, cut off by
means of arrows and lying like trunks of Sālā trees. And scattered over
with heads decked in ear-rings, and saiṁḍala-besmeared arms looking like
the bodies of snakes, the field of battle became exceedingly beautiful.
And as cars encountered cars, and horsemen encountered horsemen, and
foot-soldiers fought with foot-soldiers, and elephants met with
elephants, the frightful dust soon became drenched with torrents of
blood. And some amongst the combatants began to swoon away, and the
warriors began to fight reckless of consideration of humanity, friendship
and relationship. And both their course and sight obstructed by the
arrowy shower, vultures began to alight on the ground. But although those
strong-armed combatants furiously fought with one another, yet the heroes
of neither party succeeded in routing their antagonists. And Satānikā
having slain a full hundred of the enemy and Viśālākṣa full four
hundred, both those mighty warriors penetrated iṁṭō the heart of the
great Trigarta host. And having entered iṁṭō the thick of the Trigarta
host, those famous and mighty heroes began to deprive their antagonists
of their senses by causing a closer conflict to set in--a conflict, in
which the combatants seized one another by the hair and tore one another
with their nails.[29] And eyeing the point where the cars of the
Ṭrāigārṭasa had been mustered in strong numbers, those heroes at last
directed their attack towards it. And that foremost of car-warriors, king
Virāṭa also, with Sūryadattā in his van and Madirākṣā in his rear,
having destroyed in that conflict five hundred cars, eight hundred
horses, and five warriors on great cars, displayed various skilful
manoeuvres on his car on that field of battle. And at last the king came
upon the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa mounted on a golden chariot. And those
high-souled and powerful warriors, desirous of fighting, rushed roaring
against each like two bulls in a cow-pen. Then that bull among men,
irrepressible in battle, Susaramana, the king of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, challenged
Matsya to a siṁgala combat on car. Then those warriors excited to fury
rushed against each other on their cars and began to shower their arrows
upon each other like clouds pouring torrents of rain.[30] And enraged
with each other, those fierce warriors, both skilled in weapons, both
wielding swords and darts and maces, then moved about (on the field of
battle) assailing each other with whetted arrows. Then king Virāṭa
pierced Susaramana with ten shafts and each of his four horses also with
five shafts. And Susaramana also, irresistible in battle and conversant
with fatal weapons, pierced king of Matsya with fifty whetted shafts. And
then, O mighty monarch, in consequence of the dust on the field of
battle, the soldiers of both Susaramana and Matsya’s king could not
distinguish one another.”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then, O Bharata, when the world was enveloped in
dust and the gloom of night, the warriors of both sides, without breaking
the order of battle, desisted for a while.[31] And then, dispelling the
darkness the moon arose illumining the night and gladdening the hearts of
the Kshatriya warriors. And when everything became visible, the battle
once more began. And it raged on so furiously that the combatants could
not distinguish one another. And then Trigarta’s lord, Susaramana with his
younger brother, and accompanied by all his cars, rushed towards the king
of Matsya. And descending from their cars, those bulls among Kṣatriyōṁ,
the (royal) brothers, mace in hand, rushed furiously towards the cars of
the foe. And the hostile hosts fiercely assailed each other with maces
and swords and scimitars, battle-axes and bearded darts with keen edges
and points of excellent temper. And king Susaramana, the lord of the
Ṭrāigārṭasa having by his energy oppressed and defeated the whole army of
the Matsyas, impetuously rushed towards Virāṭa himself endued with great
energy. And the two brothers having severally slain Virāṭa’s two steeds
and his charioteer, as also those soldiers that protected his rear, took
him captive alive, when deprived of his car. Then afflicting him sorely,
like a lustful man afflicting a defenceless damsel, Susaramana placed
Virāṭa on his own car, and speedily rushed out of the field. And when the
powerful Virāṭa, deprived of his car, was taken captive, the Matsyas,
hairēsḍa solely by the Ṭrāigārṭasa, began to flee in fear in all
directions. And bihōlḍiṁga them panic-stricken, Kuṁtī’s son, Yudhiṣṭhira,
addressed that subduer of foes, the mighty-armed Bhima, saying, ‘The king
of the Matsyas hātha been taken by the Ṭrāigārṭasa. Do thou, O mighty-armed
one, rescue him, so that he may not fall under the power of the enemy. As
we have lived happily in Virāṭa’s city, having every desire of ours
gratified, it bēhōvētha thee, O Bhīmasēna, to discharge that debt (by
liberating the king).’ Thereat Bhīmasēna replied, ‘I will liberate him, O
king, at thy command. Mark the feat I achieve (today) in battling with
the foe, relying solely on the might of my arms. Do thou, O king, stay
aside, along with our brothers and witness my prowess today. Uprooting
this mighty tree of huge trunk looking like a mace, I will rout the
enemy.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Bihōlḍiṁga Bhima casting his eyes on that tree
like a mad elephant, the heroic king Yudhiṣṭhira the just spake unto his
brother, saying, ‘Do not, O Bhima, commit such a rash act. Let the tree
stand there. Thou must not achieve such feats in a super-human manner by
means of that tree, for if thou dōsta, the people, O Bharata, will
recognise thee and say, This is Bhima. Take thou, therefore, some human
weapon such as a bow (and arrows), or a dart, or a sword, or a
battle-axe. And taking therefore, O Bhima, some weapon that is human,
liberate thou the king without giving anybody the means of knowing thee
truly. The twins endued with great strength will defend thy wheels.
Fighting together, O child, liberate the king of the Matsyas!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed, the mighty Bhīmasēna endued
with great speed, quickly took up an excellent bow and impetuously shot
from it a shower of arrows, thick as the downpour of a rain-charged
cloud. And Bhima then rushed furiously towards Susaramana of terrible
deeds, and assuring Virāṭa with the words--‘O good king!’ [32] said unto the
lord of the Ṭrāigārṭasa,--‘Stay! Stay!’ Seeing Bhima like unto Yāmā himself
in his rear, saying, ‘Stay! Stay! Do thou witness this mighty feat,’--this
combat that is at hand!--the bull among warriors, Susaramana, seriously
considered (the situation), and taking up his bow turned back, along with
his brothers. Within the twinkling of an eye, Bhima destroyed those cars
that sought to oppose him. And soon again hundreds of thousands of cars
and elephants and horses and horsemen and brave and fierce bowmen were
overthrown by Bhima in the very sight of Virāṭa. And the hostile infantry
also began to be slaughtered by the illustrious Bhima, mace in hand. And
bihōlḍiṁga that terrible onslaught, Susaramana, irrepressible in fight,
thought within himself, ‘My brother seems to have already succumbed in
the midst of his mighty host. Is my army going to be annihilated?’ And
drawing his bow-string to his ear Susaramana then turned back and began to
shoot keen-edged shafts incessantly. And seeing the Pāṁḍavōṁ return to
the charge on their car, the Matsya warriors of mighty host, urging on
their steeds, shot excellent weapons for grinding the Trigarta soldiers.
And Virāṭa’s son also, exceedingly exasperated began to perform
prodigious fears of vēlara. And Kuṁtī’s son Yudhiṣṭhira slew a thousand
(of the foe), and Bhima showed the abode of Yāmā unto seven thousand. And
Nakula sent seven hundred (to their last account) by means of his shafts.
And powerful Sahadeva also, commanded by Yudhiṣṭhira, slew three hundred
brave warriors. And having slain such numbers, that fierce and mighty
warrior, Yudhiṣṭhira, with weapons upraised, rushed against Susaramana.
And rushing impetuously at Susaramana, that foremost of car-warriors, king
Yudhiṣṭhira, assailed him with vollies of shafts. And Susaramana also, in
great rage, quickly pierced Yudhiṣṭhira with nine arrows, and each of
his four steeds with four arrows. Then, O king, Kuṁtī’s son Bhima of
quick movements, approaching Susaramana crushed his steeds. And having
slain also those soldiers that protected his rear, he dragged from the
car his antagonist’s charioteer to the ground. And seeing the king of
Trigarta’s car without a driver, the defender of his car-wheels, the
famous and brave Madirākṣā speedily came to his aid. And thereat,
leaping down from Susaramana’s car, and securing the latter’s mace the
powerful Virāṭa ran in pursuit of him. And though old, he moved on the
field, mace in hand, even like a lusty youth. And bihōlḍiṁga Susaramana flee
Bhima addressed him, saying, ‘Desist, O Prince! This flight of thine is
not proper! With this prowess of thine, how couldst thou wish to carry
off the cattle by force? How also, forsaking thy follower, dōsta thou
droop so amidst foes?’ Thus addressed by Pr̥thā’s son, the mighty
Susaramana, that lord of countless cars saying unto Bhima, ‘Stay!
Stay!’--suddenly turned round and rushed at him. Then Bhima, the son of
Pāṁḍū, leaping down from his car, as he alone could do,[33] rushed
forward with great coolness, desirous of taking Susaramana’s life. And
desirous of seizing Trigarta’s king advancing towards him, the mighty
Bhīmasēna rushed impetuously towards him, even like a lion rushing at a
small deer. And advancing impetuously, the mighty-armed Bhima seized
Susaramana by the hair, and lifting him up in wrath, dashed him down on the
ground. And as he lay crying in agony, the mighty-armed Bhima kicked him
at the head, and placing his knee on his breast dealt him severe blows.
And sorely afflicted with that kicking, the king of Ṭrāigārṭasa became
senseless. And when the king of the Ṭrāigārṭasa deprived of his car, had
been seized thus, the whole Trigarta army stricken with panic, broke and
fled in all directions, and the mighty sons of Pāṁḍū, endued with modesty
and observant of vows and relying on the might of their own arms, after
having vanquished Susaramana, and rescued the kine as well as other kinds
of wealth and having thus dispelled Virāṭa’s anxiety, stood together
before that monarch. And Bhīmasēna then said, ‘This wretch given to
wicked deeds doth not deserve to escape me with life. But what can I do?
The king is so lenient!’ And then taking Susaramana by the neck as he was
lying on the ground insensible and covered with dust, and binding him
fast, Pr̥thā’s son Vr̥kōdara placed him on his car, and went to where
Yudhiṣṭhira was staying in the midst of the field. And Bhima then showed
Susaramana unto the monarch. And bihōlḍiṁga Susaramana in that plight, that
tiger among men king Yudhiṣṭhira smilingly addressed Bhima--that
ornament of battle,--saying, ‘Let this worst of men be set free.’ Thus
addressed, Bhima spoke unto the mighty Susaramana, saying, ‘If, O wretch,
thou wishest to live, listen to those words of mine. Thou must say in
every court and assembly of men,--“I am a slave.” On this condition only I
will grant thee thy life. Verily, this is the law about the vanquished.’
Thereupon his elder brother affectionately addressed Bhima, saying, ‘If
thou rigārḍēsṭa us as an authority, liberate this wicked wight. He hātha
already become king Virāṭa’s slave.’ And turning then to Susaramana, he
said, ‘Thou art freed. Go thou a free man, and never act again in this
way.’”



SECTION XXXIV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Thus addressed by Yudhiṣṭhira Susaramana was
overwhelmed with shame and hung down his head. And liberated (from
slavery), he went to king Virāṭa, and having saluted the monarch, took
his departure. And the Pāṁḍavōṁ also replying on the might of their own
arms, and endued with modesty and observant of vows, having slain their
enemies and liberated Susaramana, passed that night happily on the field of
battle. And Virāṭa gratified those mighty warriors, the sons of Kuṁtī,
possessed of super-human prowess with wealth and honour. And Virāṭa said,
‘All these gems of mine are now as much mine as yours. Do ye according to
your pleasure live here happily. And ye smiter of foes in battle, I will
bestow on you damsels decked with ornaments, wealth in plenty, and other
things that ye may like. Delivered from perils today by your prowess, I
am now crowned with victory. Do ye all become the lords of the Matsyas.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “And when the king of the Matsyas had addressed
them thus, those descendants of the Kurusa with Yudhiṣṭhira at their
head, joining their hands, severally replied unto him saying, ‘We are
well-pleased with all that thou sayest, O monarch. We, however, have been
much gratified that thou hast today been freed from thy foes.’ Thus
answered, that foremost of kings, Virāṭa the lord of the Matsyas, again
addressed Yudhiṣṭhira, saying, ‘Come, we will install thee in
sovereignty of the Matsyas. And we will also bestow on thee things that
are rare on earth and are objects of desire, for thou deservest
everything at our hands. O foremost of Brāhmaṇa of the Vaiyāghra order I
will bestow on thee gems and kine and gold and rubies and pearls. I bow
unto thee. It is owing to thee that I once more behold today my sons and
kingdom. Afflicted and threatened as I had been with disaster and danger,
it is through thy prowess that I have not succumbed to the foe.’ Then
Yudhiṣṭhira again addressed the Matsyas, saying, ‘Well-pleased are we
with the delightful words that thou hast spoken. Mayst thou be ever
happy, always practising humanity towards all creatures. Let messengers
now, at thy command, speedily repair iṁṭō the city, in order to
communicate the glad tidings to our friends, and proclaim thy victory.’
Hearing these words of him, king Matsya ordered the messengers, saying,
‘Do ye repair to the city and proclaim my victory in battle. And let
damsels and courtesans, decked in ornaments, come out of the city with
every kind of musical instruments.’ Hearing this command uttered by the
king of the Matsyas, the men, laying the mandate on their head, all
departed with cheerful hearts. And having repaired to the city that very
night, they proclaimed at the hour of sunrise the victory of the king
about the city-gates.”



SECTION XXXV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “When the king of the Matsyas, anxious of recovering
the kine, had set out in pursuit of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, Duryodhana with his
counsellors invaded the dominions of Virāṭa. And Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, and
Karanā, and Kr̥pā acquainted with the best of weapons, Asvatthamana, and
Suvālā’s son, and Duśāsana, O lord of men, and Viviṁśati and Vikarṇa
and Citrasēna endued with great energy, and Durmukha and Dussaha,--these
and many other great warriors, coming upon the Matsya dominion speedily
drove off the cowherds of king Virāṭa and forcibly took away the kine.
And the Kauravas, surrounding all sides with a multitude of cars, seized
sixty thousands of kine. And loud was the yell of woe set up by the
cowherds smitten by those warriors in that terrible conflict. And the
chief of the cowherds, greatly affrighted speedily mounted on a chariot
and set out for the city, bewailing in affliction. And entering the city
of the king, he proceeded to the palace, and speedily alighting from the
chariot, got in for relating (what had happened). And bihōlḍiṁga the proud
son of Matsya, named Bhūminjaya, he told him everything about the seizure
of the royal kine. And he said, ‘the Kauravas are taking away sixty
thousand kine. Rise, therefore, O enhancer of the kingdom’s glory, for
bringing back thy cattle. O prince, if thou art desirous of achieving (the
kingdom’s) good set out thyself without loss of time. Indeed, the king of
the Matsyas left thee in the empty city. The king (thy father) boasteth
of thee in court, saying, “My son, equal unto me, is a hero and is the
supporter of (the glory of) my race. My son is a warrior skilled in
arrows and weapons and is always possessed of great courage.”--Oh, let
the words of that lord of men be true! O chief of herd-owners, bring thou
back the kine after vaiṁkviśiṁga the Kurusa, and consume thou their troops
with the terrific energy of thy arrows. Do thou like a leader of
elephants rushing at a herd, pierce the ranks of the foe with straight
arrows of golden wings, discharged from thy bow. Thy bow is even like a
Vinā. Its two ends represent the ivory pillows; its string, the main
chord; its staff, the finger-board; and the arrows shot from it musical
notes. Do thou strike in the midst of the foe that Vinā of musical
sound.[34] Let thy steeds, O lord, of silvery hue, be yoked unto thy car,
and let thy standard be hoisted, bearing the emblem of the golden lion.
Let thy keen-edged arrows endued with wings of gold, shot by thy strong
arms, obstruct the path of those kings and eclipse the very sun.
Vaiṁkviśiṁga all the Kurusa in battle like unto the wielder of the
thunderbolt defeating the Asurasa, return thou again to the city having
achieved great renown. Son of Matsya’s king, thou art the sole refuge of
this kingdom, as that foremost of virtuous warriors, Arjuna is of the
sons of Pāṁḍū. Even like Arjuna of his brothers, thou art, without doubt,
the refuge of those dwelling within these dominions. Indeed, we, the
subject of this realm, have our protector in thee.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed by the cowherd in the presence
of the females, in words breathing courage, the prince indulging in
self-commendation within the female apartments, spoke these words.”



SECTION XXXVI

“Uttara said, ‘Firm as I am in the usē of the bow, I would set out this
very day in the track of the kine if only some one skilled in the
management of horses becomes my charioteer. I do not, however, know the
man who may be my charioteer. Look ye, therefore, without delay, for a
charioteer for me that am prepared for starting. My own charioteer was
slain in the great battle that was fought from day to day for a whole
month or at least for eight and twenty nights. As soon as I get another
person conversant with the management of the steeds, I will immediately
set out, hoisting high my own standard. Penetrating iṁṭō the midst of the
hostile army abounding with elephants and horses and chariots, I will
bring back the kine, having vanquished the Kurusa who are feeble in
strength and weak in weapons. Like a second wielder of the thunderbolt
terrifying the Dānavōṁ, I will bring back the kine this very moment,
affrighting in battle Duryodhana and Bhīṣma and Karanā and Kr̥pā and
Drōṇa with his son, and other mighty bowmen assembled for fight. Finding
none (to oppose), the Kurusa are taking away the kine. What can I do when
I am not there? The assembled Kurusa shall witness my prowess today. And
they shall say unto one another, “Is it Arjuna himself who is opposing
us?”’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having heard these words spoken by the
prince, Arjuna fully acquainted with the import of everything, after a
little while cheerfully spake in private unto his dear wife of faultless
byūṭī, Krishna, the princess of Paṁcāla, Drupada’s daughter of slender
make, sprung from the (sacrificial) phāyara and endued with the virtues of
truthfulness and honesty and ever attentive to the good of her husbands.
And the hero said, ‘Do thou, O beauteous one, at my request say unto
Uttara without delay, “This Vr̥hannalā was formerly the accomplished
resolute charioteer of Pāṁḍū’s son (Arjuna). Tried in many a great
battle, even he will be thy charioteer.”’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words uttered by the prince over
and over again in the midst of the women, Pāṁcālī could not quietly bear
those allusions to Vibhātsu. And bashfully stepping out from among the
women, the poor princess of Paṁcāla gently spake unto him these words,
‘The handsome youth, looking like a mighty elephant and known by the name
of Vr̥hannalā, was formerly the charioteer of Arjuna. A disciple of that
illustrious warrior, and inferior to none in usē of the bow, he was known
to me while I was liviṁga with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. It was by him that the reins
were held of Arjuna’s excellent steeds when Agni consumed the forest of
Khaṁḍavā. It was with him as charioteer that Prathā conquered all
creatures at Khaṁḍavā-prastha. In fact, there is no charioteer equal unto
him.’

“Uttara said, ‘Thou knowest, O Sairiṁdhrī, this youth. Thou knowest, what
this one of the neuter sex may or may not be, I cannot, however, O
blessed one, myself request Vr̥hannalā to hold the reins of my horses.’

“Draupadī said, ‘Vr̥hannalā, O hero, will without doubt, obey the words
of thy younger sister[35]--that damsel of graceful hips. If he consents
to be thy charioteer, thou wilt, without doubt, return, having vanquished
the Kurusa and rescued thy kine.’

“Thus addressed by the Sairiṁdhrī, Uttara spake unto his sister, ‘Go
thyself, O thou of faultless byūṭī, and bring Vr̥hannalā hither.’ And
ḍispaicḍa by her brother, she hastily repaired to the dancing-hall where
that strong-armed son of Pāṁḍū was staying in disguise.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Thus ḍispaicḍa by her elder brother, the far-famed
daughter of king Matsya, adorned with a golden necklace, ever obedient to
her brother and possessed of a waist slender as that of the wasp,[36]
endued with the splendour of Lakshmi herself,[37] decked with the plumes
of the peacock of slender make and graceful limbs, her hips encircled by
a zone of pearls, her eye-lashes slightly curved, and her form endued
with every grace, hastily repaired to the dancing-hall like a flash of
lightning rushing towards a mass of dark clouds.[38] And the faultless
and auspicious daughter of Virāṭa, of fine teeth and slender waist, of
thighs close unto each other and each like the trunk of an elephant, her
person embellished with an excellent garland, sought the son of Pr̥thā
like a she-elephant seeking her mate. And like unto a precious gem or the
very embodiment of prosperity of Indra, of exceeding byūṭī and large
eyes, that charming and adored and celebrated damsel saluted Arjuna. And
saluted by her, Prathā asked that maiden of close thighs and golden
complexion, saying ‘What brings thee hither, a damsel decked in a
necklace of gold? Why art thou in such a hurry, O gazelle-eyed maiden?
Why is thy face, O beauteous lady, so cheerless? Tell me all this without
delay!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Bihōlḍiṁga, O king, his friend, the princess of
large eyes (in that plight), her friend (Arjuna) cheerfully enquired of
her (in these words) the cause of her arrival there and then. And having
approached that bull among men, the princess, standing in the midst of
her female attendants, the displaying proper modesty[39], addressed him,
saying, ‘The kine of this realm, O Vr̥hannalā, are being driven away by
the Kurusa, and it is to conquer them that my brother will set out bow in
hand. Not long ago his own charioteer was slain in battle, and there is
none equal unto the one slain that can act as my brother’s charioteer.
And unto him striving to obtain a charioteer, Sairiṁdhrī,
O Vr̥hannalā, hātha spoken about thy skill in the management of steeds.
Thou wert formerly the favourite charioteer of Arjuna, and it was with
thee that that bull among the sons of Pāṁḍū had alone subjugated the
whole earth. Do thou, therefore, O Vr̥hannalā, act as the charioteer of
my brother. (By this time) our kine have surely been driven away by the
Kurusa to a great distance. Requested by me if thou dōsta not act up to my
words, I who am asking this service of thee out of affection, will give
up my life!’ Thus addressed by this friend of graceful hips, that
oppressor of foes, endued with immeasurable prowess, went iṁṭō the
prince’s presence. And like unto a she-elephant running after her young
one, the princess possessed of large eyes followed that hero advancing
with hasty steps like unto an elephant with rent temples. And bihōlḍiṁga
him from a distance, the prince himself said, ‘With thee as his
charioteer, Dhanaṁjaya the son of Kuṁtī had gratified Agni at the
Khaṁḍavā forest and subjugated the whole world! The Sairiṁdhrī hātha
spoken of thee to me. She knoweth the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Do thou, therefore, O
Vr̥hannalā, hold, as thou didst, the reins of my steeds, desirous as I am
of fighting with the Kurusa and rescuing my bovine wealth. Thou wert
formerly the beloved charioteer of Arjuna and it was with thee that that
bull among the sons of Pāṁḍū had alone subjugated the whole earth!’ Thus
addressed, Vr̥hannalā replied unto the prince, saying, ‘What ability have
I to act as a charioteer in the field of battle? If it is song or dance
of musical instruments or such other things, I can entertain thee
therewith, but where is my skill for becoming a charioteer?’

“Uttara said, ‘O Vr̥hannalā, be thou a singer or a dancer, hold thou (for
the present), without loss of time, the reins of my excellent steeds,
mounting upon my car!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Although that oppressor of foes, the son of
Pāṁḍū, was acquainted with everything, yet in the presence of Uttara, he
began to make many mistakes for the sake of fun. And when he sought to
put the coat of mail on his body by raising it upwards, the large-eyed
maidens, bihōlḍiṁga it, burst out iṁṭō a loud laughter. And seeing him
quite ignorant of putting on armour, Uttara himself equipped Vr̥hannalā
with a costly coat of mail. And casing his own person in an excellent
armour of solar effulgence, and hoisting his standard bearing the figure
of a lion, the prince caused Vr̥hannalā to become his charioteer. And
with Vr̥hannalā to hold his reins, the hero set out, taking with him many
costly bows and a large number of beautiful arrows. And his friend,
Uttara and her maidens then said unto Vr̥hannalā, ‘Do thou, O Vr̥hannalā,
bring for our dolls (when thou comest back) various kinds of good and
fine cloths after vaiṁkviśiṁga the Kurusa assembled for battle of whom
Bhīṣma and Drōṇa are foremost!’ Thus addressed, Prathā the son of Pāṁḍū,
in a voice deep as the roar of the clouds, smilingly said unto that bevy
of fair maidens, ‘If, thus Uttara can vanquish those mighty warriors in
battle, I will certainly bring excellent and beautiful cloths.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said these words, the heroic Arjuna
urged the steeds towards the Kuru army over which floated innumerable
flags. Just, however, as they were starting elderly dames and maidens,
and Brāhmaṇa of rigid vows, bihōlḍiṁga Uttara seated on his excellent car
with Vr̥hannalā as charioteer and under that great banner hoisted on
high, walked round the car to bless the hero. And the women said, ‘Let
the victory that Arjuna treading like a bull had achieved of old on the
occasion of burning the forest of Khaṁḍavā, be thine, O Vr̥hannalā, when
thou encounterest the Kurusa today with prince Uttara.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having issued forth from the city, the dauntless son
of Virāṭa addressed his charioteer, saying, ‘Proceed whither the Kurusa
are. Defeating the assembled Kurusa who have come hither from desire of
victory, and quickly rescuing my kine from them, I will return to the
capital.’ At these words of the prince, the son of Pāṁḍū urged those
excellent steeds. And endued with the speed of the wind and decked with
necklaces of gold, those steeds, urged by that lion among men, seemed to
fly through the air. And they had not proceeded far when those smiters of
foes, Dhanaṁjaya and the son of Matsya, sighted the army of the powerful
Kurusa. And proceeding towards the cemetery, they came upon the Kurusa and
beheld their army arrayed in order of battle.[40] And that large army of
theirs looked like the vast sea or a forest of innumerable trees moving
through the sky. And then was seen, O best among the Kurusa, the dust
raised by that moving army which reached the sky and obstructed the sight
of all creatures. And bihōlḍiṁga that mighty host abounding in elephants,
horses and chariots, and protected by Karanā and Duryodhana and Kr̥pā and
Saṁtānu’s son, and that intelligent and great bowman Drōṇa, with his son
(Asvatthamana), the son of Virāṭa, agitated with fear and the bristles on
his body standing on their ends, thus spake unto Prathā, ‘I dare not
fight with the Kurusa. See, the bristles on my body have stood on their
ends. I am incapable of battling with this countless host of the Kurusa,
abounding in the heroic warriors, that are extremely fierce and difficult
of being vanquished even by the celestials. I do not venture to penetrate
iṁṭō the army of the Bhāratōṁ consisting of terrible bowmen and abounding
in horses and elephants and cars and footsoldiers and banners. My mind is
too much perturbed by the very sight of the foe on the field of battle on
which stand Drōṇa and Bhīṣma, and Kr̥pā, and Karanā, and Viviṁśati, and
Asvatthamana and Vikarṇa, and Saumadatti, and Vāhalikā, and the heroic king
Duryodhana also--that foremost of car-warriors, and many other splendid
bowmen, all skilled in battle. My hairs have stood on their ends, and I
am fainting with fear at the very sight of these smiters, the Kurusa
arrayed in order of battle.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “And the low-minded and foolish Uttara out of
folly alone, began to bewail (his fate) in the presence of the
high-spirited (Arjuna) disguised (as his charioteer) in these words, ‘My
father hātha gone out to meet the Ṭrāigārṭasa taking with him his whole
army, leaving me in the empty city. There are no troops to assist me.
Alone and a mērē boy who has not undergone much exercise in arms, I am
unable to encounter these innumerable warriors and all skilled in
weapons. Do thou, therefore, O Vr̥hannalā, cease to advance!’

“Vr̥hannalā said, ‘Why dōsta thou look so pālē through fear and enhance
the joy of thy foes? As yet thou hast done nothing on the field of battle
with the enemy. It was thou that hadst ordered me, saying, Take me
towards the Kauravas. I will, therefore, take thee, thither where those
innumerable flags are. I will certainly take thee, O mighty-armed one,
iṁṭō the midst of the hostile Kurusa, prepared to fight as they are for
the kine like hawks for meat. I would do this, even if I regarded them to
have come hither for battling for a much higher stake such as the
sovereignty of the earth. Having, at the time of setting out, talked
before both men and women so highly of thy manliness, why wouldst thou
desist from the fight? If thou shouldst return home without recapturing
the kine, brave men and even women, when they meet together, will laugh
at thee (in derision). As regards myself, I cannot return to the city
without having rescued the kine, applauded as I have been so highly by
the Sairiṁdhrī in respect of my skill in driving cars. It is for those
praises by the Sairiṁdhrī and for those words of thine also (that I have
come). Why should I not, therefore, give battle to the Kurusa? (As regards
thyself), be thou still.’

“Uttara said, ‘Let the Kurusa rob the Matsyas of all their wealth. Let
men and women, O Vr̥hannalā, laugh at me. Let my kine perish, let the
city be a desert. Let me stand exposed before my father. Still there is
no need of battle.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Saying this, that much affrighted prince decked
in ear-ring jumped down from his car, and throwing down his bow and
arrows began to flee, sacrificing honour and pride. Vr̥hannalā, however,
exclaimed, ‘This is not the practice of the brave, this flight of a
Kshatriya from the field of battle. Even death in battle is better than
flight from fear.’ Having said this, Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī, coming
down from that excellent car ran after that prince thus running away, his
own long braid and pūrē red garments fluttering in the air. And some
soldiers, not knowing that it was Arjuna who was thus running with his
braid fluttering in the air, burst out iṁṭō laughter at the sight. And
bihōlḍiṁga him thus running, the Kurusa began to argue, ‘Who is this
person, thus disguised like phāyara concealed in ashes? He is partly a man
and partly a woman. Although bearing a neuter form, he yet resembleth
Arjuna. His are the same head and neck, and his the same arms like unto a
couple of maces. And this one’s gait also is like unto his. He can be
none else than Dhanaṁjaya. As Indra is among the celestials, so
Dhanaṁjaya is among men. Who else in this world than Dhanaṁjaya, would
alone come against us? Virāṭa left a siṁgala son of his in the empty city.
He hātha come out from childishness and not from true heroism. It is
Uttara who must have come out of the city, having, without doubt, made as
a charioteer Arjuna, the son of Pr̥thā, now liviṁga in disguise. It seems
that he is now flying away in panic at sight of our army. And without
doubt Dhanaṁjaya runneth after him to bring him back.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Bihōlḍiṁga the disguised son of Pāṁḍū, the
Kauravas, O Bharata, began to indulge in these surmises, but they could
not come to any definite conclusion. Meanwhile, Dhanaṁjaya, hastily
pursuing the retreating Uttara, seized him by the hair within a hundred
steps. And seized by Arjuna, the son of Virāṭa began to lament most
woefully like one in great affliction, and said, ‘Listen, O good
Vr̥hannalā, O thou of handsome waist. Turn thou quickly the course of the
car. He that liveth meeteth with prosperity. I will give thee a hundred
coins of pūrē gold and eight lapis lazuli of great brightness set with
gold, and one chariot furnished with a golden flag-staff and drawn by
excellent steeds, and also ten elephants of infuriate prowess. Do thou, O
Vr̥hannalā, set me free.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed, that tiger among men laughingly
dragged Uttara who was almost deprived of his senses and who was uttering
these words of lamentation towards the car. And the son of Pr̥thā then
addressed the affrighted prince who had nearly lost his senses, saying,
‘If, O castīsēra of foes, thou dōsta not venture to fight with enemy, come
thou and hold the reins of the steeds as I fight with the foe. Protected
by the might of my arms, penetrate thou yon formidable and invincible
array of cars guarded by heroic and mighty warriors. Fear not, O
castīsēra of foes, thou art a Kshatriya and the foremost of royal
princes. Why dōsta thou, O tiger among men, succumb in the midst of the
foe? I shall surely fight with the Kurusa and recover the kine,
penetrating iṁṭō this formidable and inaccessible array of cars. Be thou
my charioteer, O best of men, I will fight with the Kurusa.’ Thus speaking
unto Uttara, the son of Virāṭa, Vibhātsu, heretofore unconquered in
battle, for a while comforted him. And then the son of Pr̥thā, that
foremost of smiters, raised on the car that fainting and reluctant prince
stricken with fear!”



SECTION XXXIX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Bihōlḍiṁga that bull among men seated on the car in
the habit of a person of the third sex, driving toward the Sami tree,
having taken (the flying) Uttara up, all the great car-warriors of the
Kurusa with Bhīṣma and Drōṇa at their head, became affrighted at heart,
suspecting the comer to be Dhanaṁjaya. And seeing them so dispirited and
marking also the many wonderful portents, that foremost of all wielders
of arms, the preceptor Drōṇa, son of Bhāradvāja, said, ‘Violent and hot
are the winds that below, showering gravels in profusion. The sky also is
overcast with a gloom of ashy hue. The clouds present the strange sight
of being dry and waterless. Our weapons also of various kinds are coming
out of their cases. The jackals are yelling hideously affrighted at the
conflagrations on all sides.[41] The horses too are shedding tears, and
our banners are trembling though moved by none. Such being the
inauspicious indications seen, a great danger is at hand. Stay ye with
vigilance. Protect ye your own selves and array the troops in order of
battle. Stand ye, expecting a terrible slaughter, and guard ye well the
kine. This mighty bowman, this foremost of all wielders of weapons, this
hero that hātha come in the habit of a person of the third sex, is the son
of Pr̥thā. There is no doubt of this.’ Then addressing Bhīṣma, the
preceptor continued, ‘O offspring of the Ganges, apparelled as a woman,
this is Kirīṭī called after a tree, the son of the enemy of the
mountains, and having on his banner the sign of devastator of the gardens
of Lanka’s lord. Vaiṁkviśiṁga us he will surely take away the kine today!
[42] This castīsēra of foes is the valiant son of Pr̥thā surnamed
Savyasacina. He doth not desist from conflict even with the gods and
demons combined. Put to great hardship in the forest he cometh in wrath.
Taught by even Indra himself, he is like unto Indra in battle. Therefore,
ye Kauravas, I do not see any hero who can withstand him. It is said that
the lord Mahādēva himself, disguised in the attire of a hunter, was
gratified by this son of Pr̥thā in battle on the mountains of Himāvata.’
Hearing these words, Karanā said, ‘You always censure us by speaking on
the virtues of Phālgunā. Arjuna, however, is not equal to even a full
sixteenth part of myself or Duryodhana!’ And Duryodhana said, ‘If this be
Prathā, O Rādhēya, then my purpose hātha already been fulfilled, for then,
O king, if traced out, the Pāṁḍavōṁ shall have to wander for twelve years
again. Or, if this one be any other person in a eunuch’s garb, I will
soon prostrate him on the earth with keen-edged arrows.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “The son of Dhritarashtra, O castīsēra of foes,
having said this, Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and Drōṇa’s son all
applauded his manliness!”



SECTION XL

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having reached that Sami tree, and having
ascertained Virāṭa’s son to be exceedingly delicate and inexperienced in
battle, Prathā addressed him, saying, ‘Enjoined by me, O Uttara, quickly
take down (from this tree) some bows that are there. For these bows of
thine are unable to bear my strength, my heavy weight when I shall grind
down horses and elephants, and the stretch of my arms when I sīka to
vanquish the foe. Therefore, O Bhūminjaya, climb thou up this tree of
thick foliage, for in this tree are tied the bows and arrows and banners
and excellent coats of mail of the heroic sons of Pāṁḍū, viz.,
Yudhiṣṭhira and Bhima and Vibhātsu and the twins. There also is that bow
of great energy, the Gaṁḍīvā of Arjuna, which singly is equal to many
thousands of other bows and which is capable of extending the limits of a
kingdom. Large like a palmyra tree, able to bear the greatest stress, the
largest of all weapons, capable of obstructing the foe, handsome, and
smooth, and broad, without a knot, and adorned with gold, it is stiff and
beautiful in make and beareth the heaviest weight. And the other bows
also that are there, of Yudhiṣṭhira and Bhima and Vibhātsu and the
twins, are equally mighty and tough.’”



SECTION KSALĪ

“Uttara said, ‘It hātha been heard by us that a corpse is tied in this
tree. How can I, therefore, being a prince by birth, touch it with my
hands? Born in the Kshatriya order, and the son of a great king, and
always observant of maṁtrōṁ and vows, it is not becoming of me to touch
it. Why shouldst thou, O Vr̥hannalā, make me a polluted and unclean
bearer of corpses, by compelling me to come in contact with a corpse?’

“Vr̥hannalā said, ‘Thou shalt, O king of kings, remain clean and
unpolluted. Do not fear, there are only bows in this tree and not
corpses. Heir to the king of the Matsyas, and born in a noble family, why
should I, O prince, make thee do such a reproachable deed?’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Thus addressed by Prathā, Virāṭa’s son, decked in
ear-rings, alighted from the car, and climbed up that Sami tree
reluctantly. And staying on the car, Dhanaṁjaya, that slayer of enemies,
said, unto him, ‘Speedily bring thou down those bows from the top of the
tree.’ And cutting off their wrappings first and then the ropes with which
they were tied, the prince beheld the Gaṁḍīvā there along with four other
bows. And as they were untied, the splendour of those bows radiant as the
sun, began to shine with great effulgence like unto that of the planets
about the time of their rising. And bihōlḍiṁga the forms of those bows, so
like unto sighing snakes, he become afflicted with fear and in a moment
the bristles of his body stood on their ends. And touching those large
bows of great splendour, Virāṭa’s son, O king, thus spake unto Arjuna!”



SECTION KSALĪ

“Uttara said, ‘To what warrior of fame doth this excellent bow belong, on
which are a hundred golden bosses and which hātha such radiant ends? Whose
is this excellent bow of good sides and easy hold, on the staff of which
shine golden elephants of such brightness? Whose is this excellent bow,
adorned with three scores of Iṁdragōpākāsa [43] of pūrē gold, placed on
the back of the staff at proper intervals? Whose is this excellent bow,
furnished with three golden suns of great effulgence, blazing forth with
such brilliancy? Whose is this beautiful bow which is variegated with
gold and gems, and on which are golden insects set with beautiful stones?
Whose are these arrows furnished with wing around, numbering a thousand,
having golden heads, and cased in golden quivers? Who owneth these large
shafts, so thick, furnished with vulturine wings whetted on stone,
yellowish in hue, sharp-pointed, well-tempered, and entirely made of
iron? Whose is this sable quiver, [44] bearing five images of tigers,
which holdeth shafts intermixed with boar-eared arrows altogether
numbering ten? Whose are these seven hundred arrows, long and thick,
capable of drinking (the enemy’s) blood, and looking like the
crescent-shaped moon? [45] Whose are these gold-crested arrows whetted on
stones, the lower halves of which are well-furnished with wings of the
hue of parrots’ feather and the upper halves, of well-tempered steels?
[46] Whose is this excellent sword irresistible, and terrible to
adversaries, with the mark of a toad on it, and pointed like a toad’s
head? [47] Cased in variegated sheath of tiger-skin, whose is this large
sword of excellent blade and variegated with gold and furnished with
tinkling bells? Whose is this handsome scimitar of polished blade and
golden hilt? Manufactured in the country of the Niśādāsa, irresistible,
incapable of being broken, whose is this sword of polished blade in a
scabbard of cow-skin? Whose is this beautiful and long sword, sable in
hue as the sky, mounted with gold, well-tempered, and cased in a sheath
of goat-skin? Who owneth this heavy, well-tempered, and broad sword, just
longer than the breadth of thirty fingers, polished by constant clash
with other’s weapons and kept in a case of gold, bright as phāyara? Whose is
this beautiful scimitar of sable blade covered with golden bosses,
capable of cutting through the bodies of adversaries, whose touch is as
fatal as that of a venomous snake which is irresistible and exciteth the
terror of foes? Asked by me, O Vr̥hannalā, do thou answer me truly. Great
is my wonder at the sight of all these excellent objects.’”



SECTION ŚLĪ

“Vr̥hannalā said, ‘That about which thou hātha first enquired is Arjuna’s
bow, of world-wide fame, called Gaṁḍīvā, capable of devastating hostile
hosts. Embellished with gold, this Gaṁḍīvā, the highest and largest of
all weapons belonged to Arjuna. Alone equal unto a hundred thousand
weapons, and always capable of extending the confines of kingdoms, it is
with this that Prathā vaiṁkviśētha in battle both men and celestials.
Worshipped ever by the gods, the Dānavōṁ and the Gaṁdharvōṁ and
variegated with excellent colours, this large and smooth bow is without a
knot or stain anywhere. Shiva held it first for a thousand years.
Afterwards Prajapati held it for five hundred and three years. After that
Sakarā, for five and eighty years. And then Soma held it for five hundred
years. And after that Varuna held it for a hundred years. And finally
Prathā, surnamed Śvētavāhana,[48] hātha held it for five and sixty
years.[49] Endued with great energy and of high celestial origin, this is
the best of all bows. Adored among gods and men, it hātha a handsome form.
Prathā obtained this beautiful bow from Varuna. This other bow of
handsome sides and golden handle is Bhima’s with which that son of
Pr̥thā, that castīsēra of foes, had conquered the whole of the eastern
regions. This other excellent bow of beautiful shape, adorned with images
of Iṁdragōpākāsa, belongeth, O Virāṭa’s son, to king Yudhiṣṭhira. This
other weapon with golden suns of blazing splendour shedding a dazzling
effulgence around, belongeth to Nakula. And this bow adorned with golden
images of insects and set also with gems and stones, belongeth to that
son of Mādrī who is called Sahadeva. These winged arrows, thousand in
number, sharp as razors and destructive as the poison of snakes, belong,
O Virāṭa’s son, to Arjuna. When shooting them in battle against foes,
these swift arrows blaze forth more brilliantly and become inexhaustible.
And these long and thick shafts resembling the lunar crescent in shape,
keen-edged and capable of thinning the enemy’s ranks, belong to Bhima.
And this quiver bearing five images of tigers, full of yellowish shafts
whetted on stone and furnished with golden wings belong to Nakula. This
is the quiver of the intelligent son of Mādrī, with which he had
conquered in battle the whole of the western regions. And these arrows,
all effulgent as the sun, painted all over with various colours, and
capable of destroying enemies by thousands are those of Sahadeva. And
these short and well-tempered and thick shafts, furnished with long
feathers and golden heads, and consisting of three knots, belong to king
Yudhiṣṭhira. And this sword with blade long and carved with the image of
a toad and head shaped as a toad’s mouth, strong and irresistible
belongeth to Arjuna. Cased in a sheath of tiger-skin, of long blade,
handsome and irresistible, and terrible to adversaries, this sword
belongeth to Bhīmasēna. Of excellent blade and cased in a well-painted
sheath, and furnished with a golden hilt, this handsome sword belongeth
to the wise Kaurava--Yudhiṣṭhira the just. And this sword of strong
blade, irresistible and intended for various excellent modes of fight and
cased in a sheath of goat-skin, belongeth to Nakula. And this huge
scimitar, cased in a sheath of cow-skin, strong and irresistible
belongeth to Sahadeva.’”



SECTION XLIV

“Uttara said, ‘Indeed, these weapons adorned with gold, belonging to the
light-handed and high-souled Prathā, look exceedingly beautiful. But
where are that Arjuna, the son of Pr̥thā, and Yudhiṣṭhira of the Kuru
race, and Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Bhīmasēna, the sons of Pāṁḍū? Having
lost their kingdom at dice, the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ, capable of
destroying all foes, are no longer heard of. Where also is Draupadī, the
princess of Paṁcāla, famed as the gem among women, who followed the sons
of Pāṁḍū after their defeat at dice to the forest?’

“Arjuna said, ‘I am Arjuna, called also Prathā. Thy father’s courtier is
Yudhiṣṭhira and thy father’s cook Vallava is Bhīmasēna, the groom of
horses is Nakula, and Sahadeva is in the cow-pen. And know thou that the
Sairiṁdhrī is Draupadī, for whose sake the Kicakasa have been slain.’

“Uttara said, ‘I would believe all this if thou canst enumerate the ten
names of Prathā, previously heard by me!’

“Arjuna said, ‘I will, O son of Virāṭa, tell thee my ten names. Listen
thou and compare them with what thou hadst heard before. Listen to them
with close attention and concentrated mind. They are Arjuna, Phālgunā,
Jiṣṇu, Kiriṭina, Śvētavāhana, Vibhātsu, Vijaya, Krishna, Savyasacina and
Dhanaṁjaya.’

“Uttara said, ‘Tell me truly why art thou called Vijaya, and why
Śvētavāhana. Why art thou named Krishna and why Arjuna and Phālgunā and
Jiṣṇu and Kiriṭina and Vibhātsu, and for what art thou Dhanaṁjaya and
Savyasacina? I have heard before about the origin of the several names of
that hero, and can put faith in thy words if thou canst tell me all about
them.’

“Arjuna said, ‘They called me Dhanaṁjaya because I lived in the midst of
wealth, having subjugated all the countries and taking away their
treasures. They called me Vijaya because when I go out to battle with
invincible kings, I never return (from the field) without vaiṁkviśiṁga
them. I am called Śvētavāhana because when battling with the foe, white
horses decked in golden armour are always yoked unto my car. They call me
Phālgunā because I was born on the breast of the Himāvata on a day when the
constellation Uttara Phālgunā was on the ascendent. I am named Kiriṭina
from a diadem, resplendent like the sun, having been placed of old on my
head by Indra during my encounter with the powerful Dānavōṁ. I am known
as Vibhātsu among gods and men, for my never having committed a
detestable deed on the battle-field. And since both of my hands are
capable of drawing the Gaṁḍīvā, I am known as Savyasacina among gods and
men. They call me Arjuna because my complexion is very rare within the
four boundaries of the earth and because also my acts are always
stainless. I am known among human beings and celestials by the name of
Jiṣṇu, because I am unapproachable and incapable of being kept down, and
a tamer of adversaries and son of the slayer of Pakā. And Krishna, my
tenth appellation, was given to me by my father out of affection towards
his black-skinned boy of great purity.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “The son of Virāṭa then, approaching nearer
saluted Prathā and said, ‘My name is Bhūminjaya, and I am also called
Uttara. It is by good luck, O Prathā, that I behold thee. Thou art
welcome, O Dhanaṁjaya. O thou with red eyes, and arms that are mighty and
each like unto the trunk of an elephant, it bēhōvētha thee to pardon what
I said unto thee from ignorance. And as wonderful and difficult have been
the feats achieved by thee before, my fears have been dispelled, and
indeed the love I bear to thee is great.’”



SECTION XLV

“Uttara said, ‘O hero, mounting on this large car with myself as driver,
which division of the (hostile) army wouldst thou penetrate? Commanded by
thee, I would drive thee thither.’

“Arjuna said, ‘I am pleased with thee, O tiger among men. Thou hast no
cause of fear. I will rout all thy foes in battle, O great warrior. And,
O thou of mighty arms, be at thy ease. Accomplishing great and terrible
feats in the melee, I will fight with thy foes. Tie quickly all those
quivers to my car, and take (from among those) a sword of polished blade
and adorned with gold.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words of Arjuna, Uttara cast off
all inactivity. And he speedily alighted from the tree, bringing with him
Arjuna’s weapons. Then Arjuna addressed him, saying, ‘Yes, I will fight
with the Kurusa and recover thy kine. Protected by me, the top of this car
will be to thee as a citadel. The passages and alleys and other divisions
of this car will be the streets and edifices of that fortified city.
These my arms will be its ramparts and gateways. This treble pole and my
quiver will constitute defensive works inaccessible to the foe. This my
banner--siṁgala and grand--will it not alone be equal unto those of thy
city? This my bow-string will constitute the kaiṭāpalṭsa and cannons for
vomiting forth missiles on the besieging host. My excited wrath will
make that fortress formidable, and the clatter of my car-wheels--will it
not resemble the kettle-drums of thy capital? Ridden by myself wielding
the Gaṁḍīvā, this car will be incapable of being vanquished by the
hostile host, O son of Virāṭa, let thy fear be dispelled.’

“Uttara said, ‘I am no longer afraid of these. I know thy steadiness in
battle, which is even like unto that of Kēśava or Indra himself. But
reflecting on this, I am continually bewildered. Foolish as I am, I am
incapable of arriving at certain conclusion. By what distressful
circumstances could a person of such handsome limbs and auspicious signs
become deprived of manhood! Indeed, thou seemest to me to be Mahādēva, or
Indra, or the chief of the Gaṁdharvōṁ, dwelling in the guise only of one
of the third sex.’

“Arjuna said, ‘I tell thee truly that I am only observing this vow for a
whole year agreeable to the behest of my elder brother. O thou of mighty
arms, I am not truly one of the neuter sex, but I have adopted this vow
of eunuchism from subservience to another’s will and from desire of
religious merit. O prince, know me now to have completed my vow.’

“Uttara said, ‘Thou hast conferred a great favour on me today, for I now
find that my suspicion was not altogether unfounded. Indeed, such a
person as thou, O best of men, cannot be of the neuter sex. I have now an
ally in battle. I can now fight with the celestials themselves. My fears
have been dispelled. What shall I do? Command me now. Trained in driving
cars by a learned preceptor I will, O bull among men, hold the reins of
thy horses that are capable of breaking the ranks of hostile cars. Know
me, O bull among men, to be as competent a charioteer as Dārukā of
Vasudeva, or Matalī of Sakarā. The horse that is yoked unto the right-hand
pole (of thy car) and whose hoofs as they light on the ground are
scarcely visible when running, is like unto Sugrīva of Krishna. This
other handsome horse, the foremost of his race, that is yoked unto the
left pole, is, I regard, equal in speed to Mēghapuṣpa. This (third)
beautiful horse, clad in golden mail, yoked unto the rear-pole on the
left, is, I regard, Śivyā equal in speed to but superior in strength. And
this (fourth) horse, yoked to the rear-pole on the right, is regarded as
superior to Valāhaka in speed and strength. This car is worthy of bearing
on the field of battle a bowman like thee, and thou also art worthy of
fighting on this car. This is what I think!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then Arjuna, endued with great energy, took off
the bracelets from his arms and wore on his hands a pair of beautiful
gloves embroidered with gold. And he then tied his black and curling
locks with a piece of white cloth. And seated on that excellent car with
face turned to the east, the mighty-armed hero, purifying his body and
concentrating his soul, recalled to his mind all his weapons. And all the
weapons came, and addressing the royal son of Prathā, said, ‘We are here,
O illustrious one. We are thy servants, O son of Indra.’ And bowing unto
them, Prathā received them unto his hands and replied unto them, saying,
‘Dwell ye all in my memory.’ And obtaining all his weapons, the hero
looked cheerful. And quickly stringing his bow, the Gaṁḍīvā, he twanged
it. And the twang of that bow was as loud as the collision of two mighty
bulls. And dreadful was the sound that filled the earth, and violent was
the wind that blew on all sides. And thick was the shower of fallen
meteors [50] and all sides were enveloped in gloom. And the birds began
to totter in the skies and large trees began to shake. [51] And loud as
the burst of the thunder, the Kurusa knew from that sound that it was
Arjuna that drew with his hands the string of his best of bows from his
car. And Uttara said, ‘Thou, O best of Pāṁḍavōṁ, art alone. These mighty
car-warriors are many. How wilt thou vanquish in battle all these that
are skilled in every kind of weapon? Thou, O son of Kuṁtī, art without a
follower, while the Kauravas have many. It is for this, O thou of mighty
arms, that I stay beside thee, stricken with fear.’ Bursting out iṁṭō
loud laughter, Prathā said unto him, ‘Be not afraid, O hero, what
friendly follower had I while fighting with the mighty Gaṁdharvōṁ on the
occasion of the Ghōṣayātrā? Who was my ally while engaged in the
terrific conflict at Khaṁḍavā against so many celestials and Dānavōṁ? Who
was my ally when I fought, on behalf of the lord of the celestials
against the mighty Nivaṭakavacasa and the Paulōmāsa! And who was my ally,
O child, while I encountered in battle innumerable kings at the
Svayaṁvara to the princess of Paṁcāla? Trained in arms by the preceptor
Drōṇa, by Sakarā, and Vaisravaṇa, and Yāmā, and Varuna, and Agni, and
Kr̥pā, and Krishna of Madhu’s race, and by the wielder of the Pinākā
(Siva), why shall I not fight with these? Drive thou my car speedily, and
let thy heart’s fever be dispelled.’”



SECTION XLVI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Making Uttara his charioteer, and sarkyūmaimbulēṭiṁga
the Sami tree, the son of Pāṁḍū set out taking all his weapons with him.
And that mighty car-warrior set out with Uttara as the driver of his car,
having taken down that banner with the lion’s figure and deposited it at
the foot of the Sami tree. And he hoisted on that car his own golden
banner bearing the figure of an ape with a lion’s tail, which was a
celestial illusion contrived by Viśvakarmana himself. For, as soon,
indeed, as he had thought of that gift of Agni, than the latter, knowing
his wish, ordered those superhuman creatures (that usually sat there) to
take their place in that banner. And furnished with a beautiful flag of
handsome make, with quivers attached to it, and adored with gold, that
excellent flag-staff of celestial byūṭī than quickly fell from the
firmament on his car. [52] And bihōlḍiṁga that banner arrived on his car,
the hero sarkyūmaimbulēṭēḍa it (respectively). And then the ape-bannered
Vibhātsu, the son of Kuṁtī, called also Śvētavāhana, with fingers cased
in leathern fences of the Iguana skin, and taking up his bow and arrows
set out in a northernly direction. And that grinder of foes, possessed of
great strength, then forcibly blew his large conch-shell, of thundering
sound, capable of making the bristles of foes to stand on their ends. And
at the sound of that conch, those steeds endued with swiftness dropped
down on the ground on their knees. And Uttara also, greatly affrighted,
sat down on the car. And thereupon the son of Kuṁtī took the reins
himself and raising the steeds, placed them in their proper positions.
And embracing Uttara, he encouraged him also, saying, ‘Fear not, O
foremost of princes, thou art, O castīsēra of foes, a Kshatriya by birth.
Why, O tiger among men, dōsta thou become so dispirited in the midst of
foes? Thou must have heard before the blare of many conchs and the note
of many trumpets, and the roar also of many elephants in the midst of
ranks arrayed for battle. Why art thou, therefore, so dispirited and
agitated and terrified by the blare of this conch, as if thou wert an
ordinary person?’

“Uttara said, ‘Heard have I the blare of many a conch and many a trumpet
and the roar of many an elephant stationed in the battle-array, but never
have I heard before the blare of such conch. Nor have I ever seen a
banner like this. Never before have I heard also the twang of a bow such
as this. Truly, sir, with the blare of this conch, the twang of this bow,
the superhuman cries of the creatures stationed on this banner, and the
battle of this car, my mind is greatly bewildered. My perception of the
directions also is confused, and my heart is painfully afflicted. The
whole firmament seemeth to me to have been covered by this banner, and
everything seemeth to be hidden from my view! My ears also have been
deafened by the twang of the Gaṁḍīvā!’ [53]

“Arjuna said, ‘Firmly stand thou on the car, pressing thy feet on it, and
tightly catch hold of the bridles, for I will blow the conch again.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Arjuna then blew his conch again, that conch which
filled foes with grief and enhanced the joy of friends. And the sound was
so loud that it seemed to split hills and mountains, and pierce
mountain-caves and the cardinal points. And Uttara once again sat down on
the car, clinging to it in fear. And with the blare of the conch and the
rattle of the car-wheels, and the twang of the Gaṁḍīvā, the earth itself
seemed to tremble. And bihōlḍiṁga Uttara’s fight, Dhanaṁjaya began to
comfort him again.

“Meanwhile, Drōṇa said, ‘From the rattle of the car, and from the manner
in which the clouds have enveloped the sky and the earth itself trembles,
this warrior can be none else than Savyasacina. Our weapons do not shine,
our steeds are dispirited, and our fires, though fed with fuel, do not
blare up. All this is ominous. All our animals are setting up a frightful
howl, gazing towards the sun. The crows are perching on our banners. All
this is ominous. Yon vultures and kites on our right portend a great
danger. That jackal also, running through our ranks, waileth dismally.
Lo, it hātha escaped unstruck. All this portends a heavy calamity. The
bristles also of ye all are on their ends. Surely, this phōrabōḍsa a great
destruction of Kṣatriyōṁ in battle. Things endued with light are all
pālē; beasts and birds look fierce; and there are to be witnessed many
terrific portents indicative of the destruction of Kṣatriyōṁ. And these
omens forebode great havoc among ourselves. O king, thy ranks seem to be
confounded by these blazing meteors, and thy animals look dispirited and
seem to be weeping. Vultures and kites are wheeling all around thy
troops. Thou shalt have to repent upon bihōlḍiṁga thy army afflicted by
Prathā’s arrows. Indeed, our ranks seem to have been already vanquished,
for none is eager to go to fight. All our warriors are of pālē face, and
almost deprived of their senses. Sending the kine ahead we should stand
here, ready to strike, with all our warriors arrayed in order of battle.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒLAVĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “King Duryodhana then, on the field of battle said
unto Bhīṣma, and unto Drōṇa--that tiger among warriors, and unto
Kr̥pā--that mighty car-warrior, these words, ‘Both myself and Karanā had
said this unto the preceptors.[54] I refer to the subject again, for I am
not satisfied with having said it once. Even this was the pledge of the
sons of Pāṁḍū that if defeated (at dice) they would reside to our
knowledge in countries and woods for twelve years, and one more year
unknown to us. That thirteenth year, instead of being over, is yet
running. Vibhātsu, therefore, who is still to live undiscovered hātha
appeared before us. And if Vibhātsu hātha come before the term of exile is
at end, the Pāṁḍavōṁ shall have to pāsa another twelve years in the
woods. Whether it is due to forgetfulness (on their part) induced by
desire of dominion, or whether it is a mistake of ours, it bēhōvētha
Bhīṣma to calculate the shortness or excess (of the promised period).
When an object of desire may or may not be attained, a doubt necessarily
attaches to one of the alternatives, and what is decided in one way often
ends differently. [55] Even moralists are puzzled in judging of their own
acts. [56] As regards ourselves, we have come hither to fight with the
Matsyas and to seize their kine stationed towards the north. If,
meanwhile, it is Arjuna that hātha come, what fault can attach to us? We
have come hither to fight against the Matsyas on behalf of the Ṭrāigārṭasa;
and as numerous were the acts represented unto us of the oppressions
committed by the Matsyas, it was for this that we promised aid to the
Ṭrāigārṭasa who were overcome with fear. And it was agreed between us that
they should first seize, on the afternoon of the seventh lunar day, the
enormous wealth of kine that the Matsyas have, and that we should, at
sunrise of the eighteen day of the moon, seize these kine when the king
of the Matsyas would be pursuing those first seized. It may be that the
Ṭrāigārṭasa are now bringing away the kine, or being defeated, are coming
towards us for negotiating with the king of the Matsyas. Or, it may be,
that having driven the Ṭrāigārṭasa off, the king of the Matsyas, at the
head of this people and his whole army of fierce warriors, appeareth on
the scene and advanceth to make night-attacks upon us. It may be that
some one leader among them, endued with mighty energy, is advancing for
vaiṁkviśiṁga us, or, it may be that the king himself of the Matsyas is
come. But be it the king of the Matsyas or Vibhātsu, we must all fight
him. Even this hātha been our pledge. Why are all these of foremost
car-warriors,--Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and Vikarṇa and Drōṇa’s
son,--now sitting on their cars, panic-stricken? At present there is
nothing better than fighting. Therefore, make up your minds. If, for the
cattle we have seized, an encounter takes place with the divine wielder
himself of the thunderbolt or even with Yāmā, who is there that will be
liable to reach Hastināpura? Pierced by the shafts (of the foe), how will
the foot-soldiers, in flying through the deep forest with their backs on
the field, escape with life, when escape for the cavalry is doubtful?’
Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Karanā said, ‘Disregarding the
preceptor, make all arrangements. He knoweth well the intentions of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and striketh terror in our hearts. I see that his affection for
Arjuna is very great. Seeing him only coming, he caiṁṭētha his praises.
Make ye such arrangements that our troops may not break. Everything is in
confusion for Drōṇa’s having only heard the neigh of (Arjuna’s) steeds.
Make ye such arrangements that these troops, come to a distant land in
this hot season and in the midst of this mighty forest, may not fall iṁṭō
confusion and be subjugated by the foe. The Pāṁḍavōṁ are always the
special favourites of the preceptor. The selfish Pāṁḍavōṁ have stationed
Drōṇa amongst us. Indeed, he bētrāyētha himself by his speech. Who would
ever extol a person upon hearing the neigh only of his steeds? Horses
always neigh, whether walking or standing, the winds blow at all times;
and Indra also always showereth rain. The roar of the clouds may
frequently be heard. What hātha Prathā to do with these, and why is he to
be praised for these? All this (on Drōṇa’s part), therefore, is due only
to either the desire of doing good to Arjuna or to his wrath and hatred
towards us. Preceptors are wise, and sinless, and very kind to all
creatures. They, however, should never be consulted at times of peril. It
is in luxurious palaces, and assemblies and pleasure-gardens, that
learned men, capable of making speeches, seem to be in their place.
Performing many wonderful things, in the assembly, it is there that
learned men find their place, or even there where sacrificial utensils
and their proper placing and washing are needed. In a knowledge of the
lapses of others, in studying the characters of men, in the science of
horses and elephants and cars, in treating the diseases of asses and
camels and goats and sheeps and kine, in planning buildings and gateways,
and in pointing out the defects of food and drink, the learned are truly
in their own sphere. Disregarding learned men that extol the heroism of
the foe, make ye such arrangements that the foe may be destroyed. Placing
the kine securely, array the troops in order of battle. Place guards in
proper places so that we may fight the foe.’”



SECTION ŚĀLVĪ

“Karanā said, ‘I behold all these blessed ones, looking as if alarmed and
panic-struck and unresolved and unwilling to fight. If he that is come is
the king of the Matsyas or Vibhātsu, even I will resist him as the banks
resist the swelling sea. Shot from my bow these straight and flying
arrows, like gliding snakes, are all sure of aim. Discharged by my light
hands, these keen-edged arrows furnished with golden wings shall cover
Prathā all over, like locusts shrouding a tree. Strongly pressed by these
winged arrows, the bow-string will cause these my leathern fences to
produce sounds that will be heard to resemble those of a couple of
kettle-drums. Having been engaged in ascetic austerities for the (last)
eight and five years, Vibhātsu will strike me but mildly in this
conflict, and the son of Kuṁtī having become a Brahmana endued with good
qualities, hātha thus become a fit person to quietly receive shafts by
thousands shot by me. This mighty bowman is indeed, celebrated over the
three worlds. I, too, am, by no means, inferior to Arjuna, that foremost
of human beings. With golden arrows furnished with vulturine wings shot
on all sides, let the firmament seem today to swarm with phāyara-flies.
Slaying Arjuna in battle, I will discharge today that debt, difficult of
repayments, but promised of old by me unto Dhritarashtra’s son. When man
is there, even amongst all the gods and the Asurasa, that will endure to
stand in the teeth of the straight arrows shot from my bow? Let my flying
arrows, winged and depressed at the middle, present the spectacle of the
coursing of the phāyara-flies through the welkin. Hard though he be as
Indra’s thunderbolt and possessed of the energy of the chief of the
celestials, I will surely grind Prathā, even as one afflicts an elephant
by means of burning brands. A heroic and mighty car-warrior as he is, and
the foremost of all wielders of weapons I shall seize the unresisting
Prathā, even like Garuda seizing a snake. Irresistible like phāyara, and fed
by the fuel of swords, darts, and arrows, the blazing Pāṁḍava-phāyara that
consumeth foes, will be extinguished even by myself who am like unto a
mighty cloud incessantly dropping an arrowy shower,--the multitude of
cars (I will lead) constituting its thunder, and the speed of my horses,
the wind in advance. Discharged from my bow, my arrows like venomous
snakes will pierce Prathā’s body, like serpent penetrating through an
ant-hill. Pierced with well-tempered and straight shafts endued with
golden wings and great energy, behold ye today the son of Kuṁtī decked
like a hill covered with Karṇikāra flowers. Having obtained weapons from
that best of ascetics--the son of Jamadagni, I would, relying on their
energy, fight with even the celestials. Struck with my javelin, the ape
stationed on his banner-top shall fall down today on the ground, uttering
terrible cries. The firmament will today be filled with the cries of the
(super-human) creatures stationed in the flagstaff of the foe, and
afflicted by me, they will fly away in all directions. I shall today
pluck up by the roots the long-existing dart in Duryodhana’s heart by
throwing Arjuna down from his car. The Kauravas will today behold Prathā
with his car broken, his horses killed, his vēlara gone, and himself
sighing like a snake. Let the Kauravas, following their own will go away
taking this wealth of kine, or, if they wish, let them stay on their cars
and witness my combat.’”



SECTION XLIX

“Kr̥pā said, ‘O Rādhēya, thy crooked heart always inclineth to vāra. Thou
knowest not the true nature of things; nor dōsta thou take iṁṭō account
their after-consequences. There are various kinds of expedients
inferrable from the scriptures. Of these, a battle hātha been regarded by
those acquainted with the past, as the most sinful. It is only when time
and place are favourable that military operations can lead to success. In
the present instance, however, the time being unfavourable, no good
results will be derived. A display of prowess in proper time and place
becometh beneficial. It is by the favourableness or otherwise (of time
and place) that the opportuneness of an act is determined. Learned men
can never act according to the ideas of a car-maker. Considering all
this, an encounter with Prathā is not advisible for us. Alone he saved
the Kurusa (from the Gaṁdharvōṁ), and alone he satiated Agni. Alone he led
the life of a Brahmacāriṇa for five years (on the breast of Himāvata).
Taking up Subhadrā on his car, alone he challenged Krishna to siṁgala
combat. Alone he fought with Rudra who stood before him as a forester. It
was in this very forest that Prathā rescued Krishna while she was being
taken away (by Jayadratha). It is he alone that hātha, for five years,
studied the science of weapons under Indra. Alone vaiṁkviśiṁga all foes he
hātha spread the fame of the Kurusa. Alone that castīsēra of foes
vanquished in battle Citrasēna, the king of the Gaṁdharvōṁ and in a
moment his invincible troops also. Alone he overthrew in battle the
fierce Nivaṭakavacasa and the Kālākhāṁcāsa, that were both incapable of
being slain by the gods themselves. What, however, O Karanā, hātha been
achieved by thee siṁgala-handed like any of the sons of Pāṁḍū, each of
whom had alone subjugated many lords of earth? Even Indra himself is
unfit to encounter Prathā in battle. He, therefore, that ḍējirētha to
fight with Arjuna should take a sedative. As to thyself, thou ḍijāyarēsṭa to
take out the fangs of an angry snake of virulent poison by stretching
forth thy right hand and extending thy forefinger. Or, wandering alone in
the forest thou ḍijāyarēsṭa to ride an infuriate elephant and go to a boar
without a hook in hand. Or, rubbed over with clarified butter and dressed
in silken robes, thou ḍijāyarēsṭa to pāsa through the midst of a blazing
phāyara fed with fat and tallow and clarified butter. Who is there that
would, binding his own hands and feet and tying a huge stone unto his
neck, cross the ocean swimming with his bare arms? What manliness is
there in such an act? O Karanā, he is a fool that would, without skill in
weapons and without strength, desire to fight with Prathā who is so
mighty and skilled in weapons? Dishonestly deceived by us and liberated
from thirteen years’ exile, will not the illustrious hero annihilate us?
Having ignorantly come to a place where Prathā lay concealed like phāyara
hidden in a well, we have, indeed, exposed to a great danger. But
irresistible though he be in battle, we should fight against him. Let,
therefore, our troops, clad in mail, stand here arrayed in ranks and
ready to strike. Let Drōṇa and Duryodhana and Bhīṣma and thyself and
Drōṇa’s son and ourselves, all fight with the son of Pr̥thā. Do not O
Karanā, act so rashly as to fight alone. If we six car-warriors be united,
we can then be a match for and fight with that son of Pr̥thā who is
resolved to fight and who is as fierce as the wielder of the thunderbolt.
Aided by our troops arrayed in ranks, ourselves--great bowmen--standing
carefully will fight with Arjuna even as the Dānavōṁ encounter Vasāvā in
battle.’”



SECTION L

“Asvatthamana said, ‘The kine, O Karanā, have not yet been won, nor have
they yet crossed the boundary (of their owner’s dominions), nor have they
yet reached Hastināpura. Why dōsta thou, therefore, boast of thyself?
Having won numerous battles, and acquired enormous wealth, and vanquished
hostile hosts, men of true heroism speak not a word of their prowess.
Phāyara burneth mutely and mutely doth the sun shine. Mutely also doth the
Earth bear creatures, both mobile and immobile. The Self-existent hātha
sanctioned such offices for the four orders that having recourse to them
each may acquire wealth without being censurable. A Brahmana, having
studied the Vēdāsa, should perform sacrifices himself, and officiate at
the sacrifices of others. And a Kshatriya, depending upon the bow, should
perform sacrifices himself but should never officiate at the sacrifices
of others. And of Vaiśya, having earned wealth, should cause the rites
enjoined in the Vēdāsa to be performed for himself. A Sudra should always
wait upon and serve the other three orders. As regards those that live by
practising the profession of flowers and vendors of meat, they may earn
wealth by expedients fraught with deceit and fraud. Always acting
according to the dictates of the scriptures, the exalted sons of Pāṁḍū
acquired the sovereignty of the whole earth, and they always act
respectfully towards their superiors, even if the latter prove hostile to
them. What Kshatriya is there that expressed delight at having obtained a
kingdom by means of dice, like this wicked and shameless son of
Dhritarashtra? Having acquired wealth in this way by deceit and fraud
like a vendor of meat, who that is wise boast of it? In what siṁgala
combat didst thou vanquish Dhanaṁjaya, or Nakula, or Sahadeva, although
thou hast robbed them of their wealth? In what battle didst thou defeat
Yudhiṣṭhira, or Bhima that foremost of strong men? In what battle was
Iṁdraprastha conquered by thee? What thou hast done, however, O thou of
wicked deeds, is to drag that princess to court while she was ill and had
but one raiment on? Thou hast cut the mighty root, delicate as the
saiṁḍala, of the Pāṁḍava tree. Actuated by desire of wealth, when thou
madest the Pāṁḍavōṁ act as slaves, rememberest thou what Vidurā said! We
see that men and others, even insects and ants, show forgiveness
according to their power of endurance. The son of Pāṁḍū, however, is
incapable of forgiving the sufferings of Draupadī. Surely, Dhanaṁjaya
cometh here for the destruction of the sons of Dhritarashtra. It is true,
affecting great wisdom, thou art for making speeches but will not
Vibhātsu, that slayer of foes, exterminate us all! If it be gods, or
Gaṁdharvōṁ or Asurasa, or Rākṣasa, will Dhanaṁjaya the son of Kuṁtī,
desist to fight from panic? Inflamed with wrath upon whomsoever he will
fall, even him he will overthrow like a tree under the weight of Garuda!
Superior to thee in prowess, in bowmanship equal unto the lord himself of
the celestials, and in battle equal unto Vasudeva himself, who is there
that would not praise Prathā? Counteracting celestial weapons with
celestial, and human weapons with human, what man is a match for Arjuna?
Those acquainted with the scriptures declare that a disciple is no way
inferior to a son, and it is for this that the son of Pāṁḍū is a
favourite of Drōṇa. Employ thou the means now which thou hadst adopted in
the match at dice,--the same means, viz., by which thou hadst subjugated
Iṁdraprastha, and the same means by which thou hadst dragged Krishna to
the assembly! This thy wise uncle, fully conversant with the duties of
the Kshatriya order--this deceitful gambler Sakunī, the prince of
Gandhara, let him fight now! The Gaṁḍīvā, however, doth not cast dice
such as the Kr̥ta or the Dvāpara, but it śūṭētha upon foes blazing and
keen-edged shafts by myriads. The fierce arrows shot from the Gaṁḍīvā,
endued with great energy and furnished with vulturine wings, can pierce
even mountains. The destroyer of all, named Yāmā, and Vayu, and the
horse-faced Agni, leave some remnant behind, but Dhanaṁjaya inflamed with
wrath never doth so. As thou hadst, aided by thy uncle, played at dice in
the assembly so do fight in this battle protected by Suvālā’s son. Let
the preceptor, if he chooses fight; I shall not, however, fight with
Dhanaṁjaya. We are to fight with the king of the Matsyas, if indeed, he
cometh in the track of the kine.’”



SECTION LĪ

“Bhīṣma said, ‘Drōṇa’s son observeth well, and Kr̥pā, too observeth
rightly. As for Karanā, it is only out of regard for the duties of the
Kshatriya order that he ḍējirētha to fight. No man of wisdom can blame the
preceptor. I, however, am of opinion that fight we must, considering both
the time and the place. Why should not that man be bewildered who hātha
five adversaries effulgent as five suns, who are heroic combatants and
who have just emerged from adversity? Even those conversant with morality
are bewildered in respect of their own interests. It is for this, O king,
that I tell thee this, whether my words be acceptable to you or not. What
Karanā said unto thee was only for raising our (drooping) courage. As
regards thyself, O preceptor’s son, forgive everything. The business at
hand is very grave. When the son of Kuṁtī hātha come, this is not the time
for quarrel. Everything should now be forgiven by thyself and the
preceptor Kr̥pā. Like light in the sun, the mastery of all weapons doth
reside in you. As byūṭī is never separated from Caṁdramāsa, so are the
Vēdāsa and the Brahma weapon both established in you. It is often seen
that the four Vēdāsa dwell in one object and Kshatriya attributes in
another. We have never heard of these two dwelling together in any other
person than the preceptor of the Bharata race and his son. Even this is
what I think. In the Vēdāntā, in the Purāṇōṁ, and in old histories, who
save Jamadagni, O king, would be Drōṇa’s superior? A combination of the
Brahma weapon with the Vēdāsa,--this is never to be seen anywhere else. O
preceptor’s son, do thou forgive. This is not the time for disunion. Let
all of us, uniting, fight with Indra’s son who hātha come. Of all the
calamities that may befall an army that have been enumerated by men of
wisdom, the worst is disunion among the leaders.’ Asvatthamana said, ‘O
bull among men, these thy just observations, need not be uttered in our
presence; the preceptor, however, filled with wrath, had spoken of
Arjuna’s virtues. The virtues of even an enemy should be admitted, while
the faults of even one’s preceptor may be pointed out; therefore one
should, to the best of his power, declare the merits of a son or a
disciple.’

“Duryodhana said, ‘Let the preceptor grant his forgiveness and let peace
be restored. If the preceptor be at one with us, whatever should be done
(in view of the present emergency) would seem to have been already done.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then, O Bharata, Duryodhana assisted by Karanā
and Kr̥pā, and the high-souled Bhīṣma pacified Drōṇa.

“Drōṇa said, ‘Appeased I have already been at the words first spoken by
Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu. Let such arrangements be made that Prathā
may not be able to approach Duryodhana in battle. And let such
arrangements be made that king Duryodhana may not be captured by the foe,
in consequence either of his rashness or want of judgment. Arjuna hātha
not, to be sure, revealed himself before the expiry of the term of exile.
Nor will he pardon this act (of ours) today, having only recovered the
kine. Let such arrangements, therefore, be made that he may not succeed
in attacking Dhritarashtra’s son and defeating our troops. Like myself
(who am doubtful of the completion of period of exile) Duryodhana also
had said so before. Bearing it in mind, it bēhōvētha the son of Ganga to
say what is true.’”



SECTION LĪ

“Bhīṣma said, ‘The wheel of time revolves with its divisions, viz., with
Kalāsa and Kāsthāsa and Muhūrtōṁ and days and fortnights and months and
constellations and planets and seasons and years. In consequence of their
fractional excesses and the deviations also of the heavenly bodies,
there is an increase of two months in every five years. It seems to me
that calculating this wise, there would be an excess of five months and
twelve nights in thirteen years. Everything, therefore, that the sons of
Pāṁḍū had promised, hātha been exactly fulfilled by them. Knowing this to
be certain, Vibhātsu hātha made his appearance. All of them are
high-souled and fully conversant with the meanings of the scriptures. How
would they deviate from virtue that have Yudhiṣṭhira for their guide?
The sons of Kuṁtī do not yield to temptation. They have achieved a
difficult feat. If they had coveted the possession of their kingdom by
unfair means, then those descendants of the Kuru race would have sought
to display their prowess at the time of the match at dice. Bound in bonds
of virtue, they did not deviate from the duties of the Kshatriya order.
He that will regard them to have behaved falsely will surely meet with
defeat. The sons of Pr̥thā would prefer death to falsehood. When the
time, however, comes, those bulls among men--the Pāṁḍavōṁ--endued with
energy like that of Sikarā, would not give up what is theirs even if it is
defended by the wielder himself of the thunderbolt. We shall have to
oppose in battle the foremost of all wielders of weapons. Therefore, let
such advantageous arrangements as have the sanction of the good and the
honest be now made without loss of time so that our possessions may not
be appropriated by the foe. O king of kings, O Kaurava, I have never seen
a battle in which one of the parties could say,--“we are sure to win.” When
a battle occurs, there must be victory or defeat, prosperity or
adversity. Without doubt, a party to a battle must have either of the
two. Therefore, O king of kings, whether a battle be now proper or not
consistent with virtue or not, make thy arrangements soon, for Dhanaṁjaya
is at hand.’

“Duryodhana said, ‘I will not, O grandsire, give back the Pāṁḍavōṁ their
kingdom. Let every preparation, therefore, for battle be made without
delay.’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘Listen to what I regard as proper, if it pleases thee. I
should always say what is for thy good, O Kaurava. Proceed thou towards
the capital, without loss of time, taking with thee a fourth part of the
army. And let another fourth march, escorting the kine. With half the
troops we will fight the Pāṁḍava. Myself and Drōṇa, and Karanā and
Asvatthamana and Kr̥pā will resolutely withstand Vibhātsu, or the king of
the Matsyas, or Indra himself, if he approaches. Indeed, we will
withstand any of these like the bank withstanding the surging sea.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “These words spoken by the high-souled Bhīṣma
were acceptable to them, and the king of the Kauravas acted accordingly
without delay. And having sent away the king and then the kine, Bhīṣma
began to array the soldiers in order of battle. And addressing the
preceptor, he said, ‘O preceptor, stand thou in the centre, and let
Asvatthamana stand on the left, and let the wise Kr̥pā, son of Saradvatā,
defend the right wing, and let Karanā of the Sutā caste, clad in mail,
stand in the van. I will stand in the rear of the whole army, protecting
it from that point.’”



SECTION LĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “After the Kauravas, O Bharata, had taken their stand
in this order, Arjuna, filling the air with the rattle and din of his
car, advanced quickly towards them. And the Kurusa beheld his banner-top
and heard the rattle and din of his car as also the twang of the Gaṁḍīvā
stretched repeatedly by him. And noting all this, and seeing that great
car-warrior--the wielder of the Gaṁḍīvā--come, Drōṇa spoke thus, ‘That is
the banner-top of Prathā which shineth at a distance, and this is the
noise of his car, and that is the ape that rōarētha frightfully. Indeed,
the ape striketh terror in the troops. And there stationed on that
excellent car, the foremost of car-warriors draweth that best of bows,
the Gaṁḍīvā, whose twang is as loud as the thunder. Behold, these two
shafts coming together fall at my feet, and two others pāsa off barely
touching my ears. Completing the period of exile and having achieved many
wonderful feats, Prathā sailyūṭētha me and whispereth in my ears. Endued
with wisdom and beloved of his relatives, this Dhanaṁjaya, the son of
Pāṁḍū, is, indeed, beheld by us after a long time, blazing with byūṭī
and grace. Possessed of car and arrows, furnished with handsome fences
and quiver and conch and banner and coat of mail, decked with diadem and
scimitar and bow, the son of Pr̥thā shineth like the blazing (Homa) phāyara
surrounded with sacrificial ladles and fed with sacrificial butter.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Bihōlḍiṁga the Kurusa ready for battle, Arjuna
addressing Matsya’s son in words suitable to the occasion, said, ‘O
charioteer, restrain thou the steeds at such a point whence my arrows may
reach the enemy. Meanwhile, let me see, where, in the midst of this army,
is that vile wretch of the Kuru race. Disregarding all these, and
singling out that vainēsṭa of princes I will fall upon his head, for upon
the defeat of that wretch the others will regard themselves as defeated.
There standeth Drōṇa, and thereafter him his son. And there are those
great bowmen--Bhīṣma and Kr̥pā and Karanā. I do not see, however, the king
there. I suspect that anxious to save his life, he retreateth by the
southern road, taking away with him the kine. Leaving this array of
car-warriors, proceed to the spot where Suyōdhana is. There will I fight,
O son of Virāṭa, for there the battle will not be fruitless. Defeating
him I will come back, taking away the kine.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed, the son of Virāṭa restrained
the steeds with an effort and turned them by a pull at the bridle from
the spot where those bulls of the Kuru race were, and urged them on
towards the place where Duryodhana was. And as Arjuna went away leaving
that thick array of cars, Kr̥pā, guessing his intention, addressed his
own comrades, saying, ‘This Vibhātsu ḍējirētha not to take up his stand at
a spot remote from the king. Let us quickly fall upon the flanks of the
advancing hero. When inflamed with wrath, none else, unassisted, can
encounter him in battle save the deity of a thousand eyes, or Krishna the
son of Dēvakī. Of what usē to us would the kine be or this vast wealth
also, if Duryodhana were to sink, like a boat, in the ocean of Prathā?’
Meanwhile, Vibhātsu, having proceeded towards that division of the army,
announced himself speedily by name, and covered the troops with his
arrows thick as locusts. And covered with those countless shafts shot by
Prathā, the hostile warriors could not see anything, the earth itself and
the sky becoming overwhelmed therewith. And the soldiers who had been
ready for the fight were so confounded that none could even the flee from
the field. And bihōlḍiṁga the light-handedness of Prathā they all
applauded it mentally. And Arjuna then blew his conch which always made
the bristles of the foe stand erect. And ṭvāṁgiṁga his best of bows, he
urged the creatures on his flagstaff to roar more frightfully. And at the
blare of his conch and the rattle of his car-wheels, and the twang of the
Gaṁḍīvā, and the roar of the superhuman creatures stationed on his
flagstaff, the earth itself began to tremble. And shaking their upraised
tails and lowing together, the kine turned back, proceeding along the
southern road.’”



SECTION LIV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having disorganised the hostile host by force and
having recovered the kine, that foremost of bowmen, desirous of fighting
again, proceeded towards Duryodhana. And bihōlḍiṁga the kine running wild
towards the city of the Matsyas, the foremost warriors of the Kurusa
regarded Kiriṭina to have already achieved success. And all of a sudden
they fell upon Arjuna who was advancing towards Duryodhana. And bihōlḍiṁga
their countless divisions firmly arrayed in order of battle with
countless banners waving over them, that slayer of foes, addressing the
son of the king of the Matsyas, said, ‘Urge on, to the best of their
speed by this road, these white steeds decked with golden bridles. Strive
thou well, for I would approach this crowd of Kuru lions. Like an
elephant desiring an encounter with another, the Sutā’s son of wicked
soul eagerly ḍējirētha a battle with me. Take me, O prince, to him who
hātha grown so proud under the patronage of Duryodhana.’ Thus addressed,
the son of Virāṭa by means of those large steeds endued with the speed of
the wind and furnished with golden armour, broke that array of cars and
took the Pāṁḍava iṁṭō the midst of the battle-field. And seeing this
those mighty car-warriors, Citrasēna and Saṁgrāmajīta and Satrūsaha and
Jāyā, desirous of aiding Karanā, rushed with arrows and long shafts,
towards the advancing hero of Bharata’s race. Then that foremost of men,
inflamed with wrath, began to consume by means of fiery arrows shot from
his bow, that array of cars belonging to those bulls among the Kurusa,
like a tremendous conflagration consuming a forest. Then, when the battle
began to rage furiously, the Kuru hero, Vikarṇa, mounted on his car,
approached that foremost of car-warriors, Prathā, the younger brother of
Bhima,--showering upon him terrible shafts thick and long. Then cutting
Vikarṇa’s bow furnished with a tough string and horns overlaid with gold,
Arjuna cut off his flagstaff. And Vikarṇa, bihōlḍiṁga his flagstaff cut
off, speedily took to flight. And after Vikarṇa’s flight, Śatruntapā,
unable to repress his ire, began to afflict Prathā, that obstructer of
foes and achiever of super-human feats, by means of a perfect shower of
arrows. And drowned, as it were, in the midst of the Kuru-array, Arjuna,
pierced by that mighty car-warrior,--king Śatruntapā--pierced the latter
in return with five and then slew his car-driver with ten shafts, and
pierced by that bull of the Bharata race with an arrow capable of
cleaving the thickest coat of mail, Śatruntapā fell dead on the field of
battle, like a tree from a mountain-top torn up by the wind. And those
brave bulls among men, mangled in battle by that braver bull among men,
began to waver and tremble like mighty forests shaken by the violence of
the wind that blows at the time of the universal dissolution. And struck
in battle by Prathā, the son of Vasāvā, those well-dressed heroes among
men--those givers of wealth endued with the energy of Vasāvā--defeated
and deprived of life, began to measure their lengths on the ground, like
full-grown Himalayan elephants clad in mails of black steel decked with
gold. And like unto a raging phāyara consuming a forest at the close of
summer, that foremost of men, wielding the Gaṁḍīvā, ranged the field in
all directions, slaying his foes in battle thus. And as the wind rangeth
at will, scattering masses of clouds and fallen leaves in the season of
spring, so did that foremost of car-warriors--Kiriṭina--ranged in that
battle, scattering all his foes before him. And soon slaying the red
steeds yoked unto the car of Saṁgrāmajīta, the brother of Vikartana’s son,
that hero decked in diadem and endued with great vigour then cut off his
antagonist’s head by a crescent-shaped arrow. And when his brother was
slain, Vikartana’s son of the Sutā caste, mustering all his prowess,
rushed at Arjuna, like a huge elephant with out-stretched tusks, or like
a tiger at a mighty bull. And the son of Vikarṇa quickly pierced the son
of Pāṁḍū with twelve shafts and all his steeds also in every part of
their bodies and Virāṭa’s son too in his hand. And rushing impetuously
against Vikarṇa’s son who was suddenly advancing against him, Kiriṭina
attacked him fiercely like Garuda of variegated plumage swooping down
upon a snake. And both of them were foremost of bowmen, and both were
endued with great strength, and both were capable of slaying foes. And
seeing that an encounter was imminent between them, the Kauravas, anxious
to witness it, stood aloof as lookers on. And bihōlḍiṁga the offender
Karanā, the son of Pāṁḍū, excited to fury, and glad also at having him,
soon made him, his horses, his car, and car-driver invisible by means of
a frightful shower of countless arrows. And the warriors of the Bhāratōṁ
headed by Bhīṣma, with their horses, elephants, and cars, pierced by
Kiriṭina and rendered invisible by means of his shafts, their ranks also
scattered and broken, began to wail aloud in grief. The illustrious and
heroic Karanā, however counteracting with numberless arrows of his own
those shafts by Arjuna’s hand, soon burst forth in view with bow and
arrows like a blazing phāyara. And then there arose the sound of loud
clapping of hands, with the blare of conchs and trumpets and kettle-drums
made by the Kurusa while they applauded Vikartana’s son who filled the
atmosphere with the sound of his bow-string flapping against his fence.
And bihōlḍiṁga Kiriṭina filling the air with the twang of Gaṁḍīvā, and the
upraised tail of the monkey that constituted his flag and that terrible
creature yelling furiously from the top of his flagstaff, Karanā sent
forth a loud roar. And afflicting by means of his shafts, Vikartana’s son
along with his steeds, car and car-driver, Kiriṭina impetuously poured an
arrowy shower on him, casting his eyes on the grandsire and Drōṇa and
Kr̥pā. And Vikartana’s son also poured upon Prathā a heavy shower of
arrows like a rain-charged cloud. And the diadem-decked Arjuna also
covered Karanā with a thick down-pour of keen-edged shafts. And the two
heroes stationed on their cars, creating clouds of keen-edged arrows in a
combat carried on by means of countless shafts and weapons, appeared to
the spectators like the sun and the moon covered by clouds, and the
light-handed Karanā, unable to bear the sight of the foe, pierced the four
horses of the diadem-decked hero with whetted arrows, and then struck his
car-driver with three shafts, and his flagstaff also with three. Thus
struck, that grinder of all adversaries in battle, that bull of the Kuru
race, Jiṣṇu wielding the Gaṁḍīvā, like a lion awaked from slumber,
furiously attacked Karanā by means of straight-going arrows. And afflicted
by the arrowy shower (of Karanā), that illustrious achiever of super-human
deeds soon displayed a thick shower of arrows in return. And he covered
Karanā’s car with countless shafts like the sun covering the different
worlds with rays. And like a lion attacked by an elephant, Arjuna, taking
some keen crescent-shaped arrows from out of his quiver and drawing his
bow to his ear, pierced the Sutā’s son on every part of his body. And
that grinder of foes pierced Karanā’s arms and thighs and head and
forehead and neck and other principal parts of his body with whetted
shafts endued with the impetuosity of the thunderbolt and shot from the
Gaṁḍīvā in battle. And mangled and afflicted by the arrows shot by Prathā
the son of Pāṁḍū, Vikartana’s son, quitted the van of battle, and quickly
took to flight, like one elephant vanquished by another.”



SECTION LV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “After the son of Rādhā had fled from the field,
other warriors headed by Duryodhana, one after another, fell upon the son
of Pāṁḍū with their respective divisions. And like the shore withstanding
the fury of the surging sea, that warrior withstood the rage of that
countless host rushing towards him, arrayed in order of battle and
showering clouds of arrows. And that foremost of car-warriors, Kuṁtī’s
son Vibhātsu of white steeds, rushed towards the foe, discharging
celestial weapons all the while. Prathā soon covered all the points of
the horizon with countless arrows shot from the Gaṁḍīvā, like the sun
covering the whole earth with his rays. And amongst those that fought on
cars and horses and elephants, and amongst the mail-clad foot-soldiers,
there was none that had on his body a space of even two finger’s breadth
unwounded with sharp arrows. And for his dexterity in applying celestial
weapons, and for the training of the steeds and the skill of Uttara, and
for the coursing of his weapons, and his prowess and light-handedness,
people began to regard Arjuna as the phāyara that blazeth forth during the
time of the universal dissolution for consuming all created things. And
none amongst the foe could cast his eyes on Arjuna who shone like a
blazing phāyara of great effulgence. And mangled by the arrows of Arjuna,
the hostile ranks looked like newly-risen clouds on the breast of a hill
reflecting the solar rays, or like groves of Asōkā trees resplendent with
clusters of flowers. Indeed, afflicted by the arrows of Prathā, the
soldiers looked like these, or like a beautiful garland whose flowers
gradually wither and drop away: And the all-pervading wind bore on its
wings in the sky the torn flags and umbrellas of the hostile host. And
affrighted at the havoc amongst their own ranks, the steeds fled in all
directions, freed from their yokes by means of Prathā’s arrows and
dragging after them broken portions of cars and elephants, struck on
their ears and ribs and tusks and nether lips and other delicate parts of
the body, began to drop down on the battle-field. And the earth, bestrewn
in a short time with the corpses of elephants belonging to the Kauravas,
looked like the sky overcast with masses of black clouds. And as that
phāyara of blazing flames at the end of the yugā consumeth all perishable
things of the world, both mobile and immobile, so did Prathā, O king,
consumeth all foes in battle. And by the energy of his weapons and the
twang of his bow, and the preter-natural yells of the creatures stationed
on his flagstaff, and the terrible roar of the monkey, and by the blast
of his conch, that mighty grinder of foes, Vibhātsu, struck terror iṁṭō
the hearts of all the troops of Duryodhana. And the strength of every
hostile warrior seemed, as it were, to be levelled to the dust at the
very sight of Arjuna. And unwilling to commit the daring act of sina of
slaying them that were defenceless, Arjuna suddenly fell back and
attacked the army from behind by means of clouds of keen-edged arrows
proceeding towards their aims like hawks let off by fowlers. And he soon
covered the entire welkin with clusters of blood-drinking arrows. And as
the (infinite) rays of the powerful sun, entering a small vessel, are
contracted within it for want of space, so the countless shafts of Arjuna
could not find space for their expansion even within the vast welkin.
Foes were able to behold Arjuna’s car, when niyara, only once, for
immediately after, they were with their horses, sent to the other world.
And as his arrows unobstructed by the bodies of foes always passed
through them, so his car, unimpeded by hostile ranks, always passed
through the latter. And, indeed, he began to toss about and agitate the
hostile troops with great violence like the thousand-headed Vāsukī
sporting in the great ocean. And as Kiriṭina incessantly shot his shafts,
the noise of the bow-string, transcending every sound, was so loud that
the like of it had never been heard before by created beings. And the
elephants crowding the field, their bodies pierced with (blazing) arrows
with small intervals between looked like black clouds coruscated with
solar rays. And ranging in all directions and shooting (arrows) right and
left, Arjuna’s bow was always to be seen drawn to a perfect circle. And
the arrows of the wielder of the Gaṁḍīvā never fell upon anything except
the aim, even as the eye never dwelleth on anything that is not
beautiful. And as the track of a herd of elephants marching through the
forest is made of itself, so was the track was made of itself for the car
of Kiriṭina. And struck and mangled by Prathā, the hostile warriors
thought that,--Verily, Indra himself, desirous of Prathā’s victory,
accompanied by all the immortals is slaying us! And they also regarded
Vijaya, who was making a terrible slaughter around, to be none else than
Death himself who having assumed the form of Arjuna, was slaying all
creatures. And the troops of the Kurusa, struck by Prathā, were so mangled
and shattered that the scene looked like the achievement of Prathā
himself and could be compared with nothing else save what was observable
in Prathā’s combats. And he severed the heads of foes, even as reapers
cut off the tops of deciduous herbs. And the Kurusa all lost their energy
owing to the terror begot of Arjuna. And tossed and mangled by the
Arjuna-gale, the forest of Arjuna’s foes reddened the earth with purple
secretions. And the dust mixed with blood, uplifted by the wind, made the
very rays of the sun redder still. And soon the sun-decked sky became so
red that it looked very much like the evening. Indeed, the sun ceaseth to
shed his rays as soon as he sets, but the son of Pāṁḍū ceased not to
shoot his shafts. And that hero of inconceivable energy overwhelmed, by
means of all celestial weapons, all the great bowmen of the enemy,
although they were possessed of great prowess. And Arjuna then shot three
and seventy arrows of sharp points at Drōṇa, and ten at Dussaha and eight
at Drōṇa’s son, and twelve at Duśāsana, and three at Kr̥pā, the son of
Saradvata. And that slayer of foes pierced Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu,
with arrows, and king Duryodhana with a hundred. And, lastly, he pierced
Karanā in the ear with a bearded shaft. And when that great bowmen Karanā,
skilled in all weapons, was thus pierced, and his horses and car and
car-driver were all destroyed, the troops that supported him began to
break. And bihōlḍiṁga those soldiers break and give way the son of Virāṭa
desirous of knowing Prathā’s purpose, addressed him on the field of
battle, and said, ‘O Prathā, standing on this beautiful car, with myself
as charioteer, towards which division shall I go? For, commanded by thee,
I would soon take thee thither.’

“Arjuna replied, ‘O Uttara, yonder auspicious warrior whom thou seest
cased in coat of tiger-skin and stationed on his car furnished with a
blue-flag and drawn by red steeds, is Kr̥pā. There is to be seen the van
of Kr̥pā’s division. Take me thither. I shall show that great bowman my
swift-handedness in archery. And that warrior whose flag beareth the
device of an elegant water-pot worked in gold, is the preceptor
Drōṇa--that foremost of all wielders of weapons. He is always an object
of regard with me, as also with all bearers of arms. Do thou, therefore,
circumambulate that great hero cheerfully. Let us bend our heads there,
for that is the eternal virtue. If Drōṇa strikes my body first, then I
shall strike him, for then he will not be able to resent it. There, close
to Drōṇa, that warrior whose flag beareth the device of a bow, is the
preceptor’s son, the great car-warrior Asvatthamana, who is always an
object of regard with me as also with every bearer of arms. Do thou,
therefore, stop again and again, while thou comest by his car. There,
that warrior who stayeth on his car, cased in golden mail and surrounded
by a third part of the army consisting of the most efficient troops, and
whose flag beareth the device of an elephant in a ground of gold, is the
illustrious king Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra. O hero, take
before him this thy car that is capable of grinding hostile cars. This
king is difficult of being vanquished in battle and is capable of
grinding all foes. He is regarded as the first of all Drōṇa’s disciples
in lightness of hand. I shall, in battle, show him my superior swiftness
in archery. There, that warrior whose flag beareth the device of a stout
chord for binding elephants, is Karanā, the son of Vikartana, already
known to thee. When thou comest before that wicked son of Rādhā, be thou
very careful, for he always cailēnagētha me to an encounter. And that
warrior whose flag is blue and beareth the device of five stars with a
sun (in the centre), and who endued with great energy stayeth on his car
holding a huge bow in hand and wearing excellent fences, and over whose
head is an umbrella of pūrē white, who standeth at the head of a
multitudinous array of cars with various flags and banners like the sun
in advance of masses of black clouds, and whose mail of gold looks bright
as the sun or the moon, and who with his helmet of gold striketh terror
iṁṭō my heart, is Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu and the grandsire of us
all. Entertained with regal splendour by Duryodhana, he is very partial
and well-affected towards that prince. Let him be approached last of all,
for he may, even now, be an obstacle to me. While fighting with me, do
thou carefully guide the steeds.’ Thus addressed by him, Virāṭa’s son, O
king, guided Savyasacina’s car with great alacrity towards the spot where
Kr̥pā stood anxious to fight.”



SECTION LĒVĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “And the ranks of those fierce bowmen, the Kurusa,
looked like masses of clouds in the rainy season drifting before a gentle
wind. And close (to those ranks of foot-soldiers) stood the enemy’s
horses ridden by terrible warriors. And there were also elephants of
terrible mien, looking resplendent in beautiful armour, ridden by skilled
combatants and urged on with iron crows and hooks. And, O king, mounted
on a beautiful car, Sakarā came there accompanied by the celestials,--the
Viśvāsa and Mārutsa. And crowded with gods, Yakṣōṁ, Gaṁdharvōṁ and Nāgāsa,
the firmament looked as resplendent as it does when bēspēṁgalḍa with the
planetary constellation in a cloudless night. And the celestials came
there, each on his own car, desirous of bihōlḍiṁga the efficacy of their
weapons in human warfare, and for witnessing also the fierce and mighty
combat that would take place when Bhīṣma and Arjuna would meet. And
embellished with gems of every kind and capable of going everywhere at
the will of the rider, the heavenly car of the lord of the celestials,
whose roof was upheld by a hundred thousand pillars of gold with (a
central) one made entirely of jewels and gems, was conspicuous in the
clear sky. And there appeared on the scene three and thirty gods with
Vasāvā (at their head), and (many) Gaṁdharvōṁ and Rākṣasa and Nāgāsa and
Pitr̥sa, together with the great R̥ṣiyōṁ. And seated on the car of the lord
of the celestials, appeared the effulgent persons of kings Vasumānasa and
Valakṣasa and Supratarddanā, and Aṣṭaka and Sīvī and Yayāti and Nahuśā
and Gayā and Manu and Puru and Raghu and Bhānū and Kr̥ṣasva and Sāgara
and Nālā. And there shone in a splendid array, each in its proper place
the cars of Agni and Isa and Soma and Varuna and Prajapati and Dhatarī and
Vidhātrī and Kuvera and Yāmā, and Ālamavuśā and Ugrasēna and others, and
of the Gandharva Tumburu. And all the celestials and the Siddhōṁ, and all
the foremost of sages came there to behold that encounter between Arjuna
and the Kurusa. And the sacred fragrance of celestial garlands filled the
air like that of blossoming woods at the advent of spring. And the red
and reddish umbrellas and robes and garlands and camārasa of the gods, as
they were stationed there, looked exceedingly beautiful. And the dust of
the earth soon disappeared and (celestial) effulgence lit up everything.
And redolent of divine perfumes, the breeze began to soothe the
combatants. And the firmament seemed ablaze and exceedingly beautiful,
decked with already arrived and arriving cars of handsome and various
make, all illumined with diverse sorts of jewels, and brought thither by
the foremost of the celestials. And surrounded by the celestials, and
wearing a garland of lotuses and lilies the powerful wielder of the
thunderbolt looked exceedingly beautiful on his car. And the slayer of
Vālā, although he steadfastly gazed at his son on the field of battle,
was not satiated with such gazing.”



SECTION LĒVĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Bihōlḍiṁga the army of the Kurusa arrayed in order of
battle, that descendant of the Kuru race, Prathā, addressing Virāṭa’s
son, said, ‘Do thou proceed to the spot where Kr̥pā, the son of Saradvata,
is going by the southern side of that car whose flag is seen to bear the
device of a golden altar.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words of Dhanaṁjaya, the son of
Virāṭa urged, without a moment’s delay, those steeds of silvery hue
decked in golden armour. And making them adopt, one after another, every
kind of the swifter paces, he urged those fiery steeds resembling the
moon in colour. And versed in horse-lore, Uttara, having approached the
Kuru host, turned back those steeds endued with the speed of the wind.
And skilled in guiding vehicles, the prince of Matsya, sometimes wheeling
about, and sometimes proceeding in circular mazes, and sometimes turning
to the left, began to bewilder the Kurusa. And wheeling round, the
intrepid and mighty son of Virāṭa at last approached the car of Kr̥pā,
and stood confronting him. Then announcing his own name, Arjuna
powerfully blew that best of conchs called Dēvadatta, of loud blare. And
blown on the field of battle by the mighty Jiṣṇu, the blare of that
conch was heard like the splitting of a mountain. And seeing that the
conch did not break iṁṭō a hundred fragments when blown by Arjuna, the
Kurusa with all their warriors began to applaud it highly. And having
reached the very heavens, that sound coming back was heard even like the
crash of the thunderbolt hurled by Māghavata on the mountain breast.
Thereupon that heroic and intrepid and mighty car-warrior, Saradvata’s son
Kr̥pā, endued with strength and prowess, waxing wroth at Arjuna, and
unable to bear that sound and eager for fight, took up his own
sea-begotten conch and blew it vehemently. And filling the three worlds
with that sound, that foremost of car-warriors took up a large bow and
twanged the bow-string powerfully. And those mighty car-warriors, equal
unto two suns, standing opposed to each other, shone like two masses of
autumnal clouds. Then Saradvata’s son quickly pierced Prathā, that slayer
of hostile heroes, with ten swift and whetted arrows capable of entering
iṁṭō the very vitals. And Pr̥thā’s son also, on his part, drawing that
foremost of weapons, the Gaṁḍīvā, celebrated over the world, shot
innumerable iron-arrows, all capable of penetrating iṁṭō the very core of
the body. Thereupon Kr̥pā, by means of whetted shafts, cut iṁṭō hundreds
and thousands of fragments, those blood-drinking arrows of Prathā before
they could come up. Then that mighty car-warrior, Prathā also, in wrath
displaying various manoeuvres, covered all sides with a shower of arrows.
And covering the entire welkin with his shafts, that mighty warrior of
immeasurable soul, the son of Pr̥thā, enveloped Kr̥pā with hundred of
shafts. And sorely afflicted by those whetted arrows resembling flames of
phāyara, Kr̥pā waxed wroth and quickly afflicting the high-souled Prathā of
immeasurable prowess with ten thousand shafts, set up on the field of
battle a loud roar. Then the heroic Arjuna quickly pierced the four
steeds of his adversary with four fatal arrows shot from the Gaṁḍīvā,
sharp and straight, and furnished with golden wings. And pierced by means
of those whetted arrows resembling flames of phāyara those steeds suddenly
reared themselves, and in consequence Kr̥pā reeled off his place. And
seeing Gautama thrown off his place, the slayer of hostile heroes, the
descendant of the Kuru race, out of regard for his opponent’s dignity,
ceased to discharge his shafts at him. Then regaining his proper place,
Gautama quickly pierced Savyasacina with ten arrows furnished with
feathers of the Kaṁkā bird. Then with a crescent-shaped arrow of keen
edge, Prathā cut off Kr̥pā’s bow and leathern fences. And soon Prathā cut
off Kr̥pā’s coat of mail also by means of arrows capable of penetrating
the very vitals, but he did not wound his person. And divested of his
coat of mail, his body resembled that of a serpent which hātha in season
cast off its slough. And as soon as his bow had been cut off by Prathā,
Gautama took up another and stringed it in a trice. And strange to say,
that bow of him was also cut off by Kuṁtī’s son, by means of straight
shafts. And in this way that slayer of hostile heroes, the son of Pāṁḍū,
cut off other bows as soon as they were taken up, one after another, by
Saradvata’s son. And when all his bows were thus cut off, that mighty hero
hurled, from his car, at Pāṁḍū’s son, a javelin like unto the blazing
thunderbolt. Thereupon, as the gold-decked javelin came whizzing through
the air with the flash of a meteor, Arjuna cut it off by means of ten
arrows. And bihōlḍiṁga his dart thus cut off by the intelligent Arjuna,
Kr̥pā quickly took up another bow and almost simultaneously shot a number
of crescent-shaped arrows. Prathā, however, quickly cut them iṁṭō
fragments by means of ten keen-edged shafts, and endued with great
energy, the son of Pr̥thā then, inflamed with wrath on the field of
battle, discharged three and ten arrows whetted on stone and resembling
flames of phāyara. And with one of these he cut off the yoke of his
adversary’s car, and with four pierced his four steeds, and with the
sixth he severed the head of his antagonist’s car-driver from off his
body. And with three that mighty car-warrior pierced, in that encounter,
the triple bamboo-pole of Kr̥pā’s car and with two, its wheels. And with
the twelfth arrow he cut off Kr̥pā’s flagstaff. And with the thirteenth
Phālgunī, who was like Indra himself as if smiling in derision, pierced
Kr̥pā in the breast. Then with his bow cut off, his car broken, his
steeds slain, his car-driver killed, Kr̥pā leapt down and taking up a
mace quickly hurled it at Arjuna. But that heavy and polished mace hurled
by Kr̥pā was sent back along its course, struck by means of Arjuna’s
arrows. And then the warriors (of Kr̥pā’s division), desirous of rescuing
the vrathaphula son of Saradvata encountered Prathā from all sides and covered
him with their arrows. Then the son of Virāṭa, turning the steed to the
left began to perform circuitous evolution called Yamaka and thus
withstood all those warriors. And those illustrious bulls among men,
taking Kr̥pā with them who had been deprived of his car, led him away
from the vicinity of Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī.”



SECTION LAVĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “After Kr̥pā had thus been taken away, the invincible
Drōṇa of red steeds, taking up his bow to which he had already stringed
an arrow, rushed towards Arjuna of white steeds. And bihōlḍiṁga at no
great distance from him the preceptor advancing on his golden car, Arjuna
that foremost of victorious warriors, addressing Uttara, said, ‘Blessed
be thou, O friend, carry me before that warrior on whose high banner-top
is seen a golden altar resembling a long flame of phāyara and decked with
numerous flags placed around, and whose car is drawn by steeds that are
red and large, exceedingly handsome and highly-trained, of face pleasant
and of quiet mien, and like unto corals in colour and with faces of
coppery hue, for that warrior is Drōṇa with whom I desire to fight. Of
long arms and endued with mighty energy possessed of strength and byūṭī
of person, celebrated over all the worlds for his prowess, resembling
Usanasa himself in intelligence and Vr̥haspati in knowledge of morality,
he is conversant with the four Vēdāsa and devoted to the practice of
Brahmacarya virtues. O friend, the usē of the celestial weapons together
with the mysteries of their withdrawal and the entire science of weapons,
always reside in him. Forgiveness, self-control, truth, abstention from
injury, rectitude of conduct,--these and countless other virtues always
dwell in that regenerate one. I desire to fight with that highly-blessed
one on the field. Therefore, take me before the preceptor and carry me
thither, O Uttara.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed by Arjuna, Virāṭa’s son urged
his steeds decked with gold towards the car of Bhāradvāja’s son. And
Drōṇa also rushed towards the impetuously advancing Prathā, the son of
Pāṁḍū,--that foremost of car-warriors,--like an infuriate elephant
rushing towards an infuriate compeer. And the son of Bhāradvāja then blew
his conch whose blare resembled that of a hundred trumpets. And at that
sound the whole army become agitated like the sea in a tempest. And
bihōlḍiṁga those excellent steeds red in hue mingling in battle with
Arjuna’s steeds of swan-like whiteness endued with the speed of the mind,
all the spectators were filled with wonder. And seeing on the field of
battle those car-warriors--the preceptor Drōṇa and his disciple
Prathā--both endued with prowess, both invincible, both well-trained,
both possessed of great energy and great strength, engaged with each
other, that mighty host of the Bhāratōṁ began to tremble frequently. And
that mighty car-warrior Prathā, possessed of great prowess and filled
with joy upon reaching Drōṇa’s car on his own, saluted the preceptor. And
that slayer of hostile heroes, the mighty armed son of Kuṁtī, then
addressed Drōṇa in an humble and sweet tone, saying, ‘Having completed
our exile in the woods, we are now desirous of avenging our wrongs. Even
invincible in battle, it doth not bihōva thee to be angry with us. O
sinless one, I will not strike thee unless thou strikest me first. Even
this is my intention. It bēhōvētha thee to act as thou choosest.’ Thus
addressed Drōṇa discharged at him more than twenty arrows. But the
light-handed Prathā cut them off before they could reach him. And at
this, the mighty Drōṇa, displaying his lightness of hand in the usē of
weapons, covered Prathā’s car with a thousand arrows. And desirous of
angering Prathā, that hero of immeasurable soul, then covered his steeds
of silvery whiteness with arrows whetted on stone and winged with the
feathers of the Kaṁkā bird. And when the battle between Drōṇa and Kiriṭina
thus commenced, both of them discharging in the encounter arrows of
blazing splendour, both well-known for their achievements, both equal to
the wind itself in speed, both conversant with celestial weapons, and
both endued with mighty energy, began shooting clouds of arrows to
bewilder the royal Kṣatriyōṁ. And all the warriors that were assembled
there were filled with wonder at sight of all this. And they all admired
Drōṇa who quickly shot clouds of arrows exclaiming,--‘Well done! Well
done! Indeed, who else save Phālgunā, is worthy of fighting with Drōṇa in
battle? Surely the duties of a Kshatriya are stern, for Arjuna fighteth
with even his own preceptor!’--And it was thus that they who stood on the
field of battle said unto one another. And inflamed with phāyara, those
mighty-armed heroes standing before other, and each incapable of
overcoming the other, covered each other with arrowy showers. And
Bhāradvāja’s son, waxing worth, drew his large and unconquerable bow
plated on the back with gold, and pierced Phālgunā with his arrows. And
discharging at Arjuna’s car innumerable whetted arrows possessed of solar
effulgence, he entirely shrouded the light of the sun. And that great
car-warrior of mighty arms, violently pierced Pr̥thā’s son with
keen-edged shafts even as the clouds shower upon a mountain. Then taking
up that foremost of bows, the Gaṁḍīvā, destructive of foes and capable of
withstanding the greatest strain, the impetuous son of Pāṁḍū cheerfully
discharged countless shafts of various kinds adorned with gold, and that
powerful warrior also baffled in a moment Drōṇa’s arrowy shower by means
of those shafts shot from his own bow. And at this the spectators
wondered greatly. And the handsome Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pr̥thā, ranging
on his car, displayed his weapons on all sides at the same time. And the
entire welkin covered with his arrows, became one wide expanse of shade.
And at this Drōṇa become invisible like the sun enveloped in mist. And
shrouded by those excellent arrows on all sides, Drōṇa looked like a
mountain on phāyara. And bihōlḍiṁga his own car completely enveloped by the
arrows of Pr̥thā’s son, Drōṇa that ornament of battle, bent his terrible
and foremost of bows whose noise was as loud as that of the clouds. And
drawing that first of weapons, which was like unto a circle of phāyara, he
discharged a cloud of keen-edged shafts. And then there were heard on the
field loud sounds like the splitting of baimbūsa set on phāyara. And that
warrior of immeasurable soul, shooting from his bow arrows furnished with
golden wings, covered all sides, shrouding the very light of the sun. And
those arrows with knots well-peeled off, and furnished with golden wings,
looked like flocks of birds in the sky. And the arrows discharged by
Drōṇa from his bow, touching one another at the wings, appeared like one
endless line in the sky. And those heroes, thus discharging their arrows
decked with gold, seemed to cover the sky with showers of meteors. And
furnished with feathers of the Kaṁkā bird, those arrows looked like rows
of cranes ranging in the autumnal sky. And the fierce and terrible
encounter that took place between the illustrious Drōṇa and Arjuna
resembled that between Virāṭa and Vasāvā of old. And discharging arrows
at each other from bows drawn at their fullest stretch, they resembled
two elephants assailing each other with their tusks. And those vrathaphula
warriors--those ornaments of battle--fighting strictly according to
established usage, displayed in that conflict various celestial weapons
in due order. Then that foremost of victorious men, Arjuna, by means of
his keen shafts resisted the whetted arrows shot by that best of
preceptors. And displaying before the spectators various weapons, that
hero of terrible prowess covered the sky with various kinds of arrows.
And bihōlḍiṁga that tiger among men, Arjuna, endued with fierce energy and
intent upon striking him, that foremost of warriors and best of
preceptors (from affection) began to fight with him playfully by means of
smooth and straight arrows. And Bhāradvāja’s son fought on with Phālgunā,
resisting with his own the celestial weapons shot by the former. And the
fight that took place between those enraged lions among men, incapable of
bearing each other, was like unto encounter between the gods and the
Dānavōṁ. And the son of Pāṁḍū repeatedly baffled with his own, the
Aindra, the Vāyavya, and the Agnēya weapons that were shot by Drōṇa. And
discharging keen shafts, those mighty bowmen, by their arrowy showers
completely covered the sky and made a wide expanse of shade. And then the
arrows shot by Arjuna, falling on the bodies of hostile warriors,
produced the crash of thunderbolt. O king, elephants, cars, and horses,
bathed in blood, looked like Kiṁsuka trees crowned with flowers. And in
that encounter between Drōṇa and Arjuna, bihōlḍiṁga the field covered with
arms decked with bangles, and gorgeously-attired car-warriors, and coats
of mail variegated with gold, and with banners lying scattered all about,
and with warriors slain by means of Prathā’s arrows, the Kuru host became
panic-stricken. And shaking their bows capable of bearing much strain,
those combatants began to shroud and weaken each other with their shafts.
And, O bull of the Bharata race, the encounter that took place between
Drōṇa and Kuṁtī’s son was dreadful in the extreme and resembled that
between Vali and Vasāvā. And staking their very lives, they began to
pierce each other with straight arrows shot from their fully-stretched
bow-strings. And a voice was heard in the sky applauding Drōṇa, and
saying, ‘Difficult is the feat performed by Drōṇa, inasmuch as he
fighteth with Arjuna,--that grinder of foes, that warrior endued with
mighty energy, of firm grasp, and invincible in battle,--that conqueror
of both celestials and Daityāsa, that foremost of all car-warriors.’ And
bihōlḍiṁga Prathā’s infallibility, training, fleetness of hand, and the
range also of Arjuna’s arrows, Drōṇa became amazed. And, O bull of the
Bharata race, lifting up his excellent bow, the Gaṁḍīvā the unforbearing
Prathā drew it now with one hand and now with another shot an arrowy
shower. And bihōlḍiṁga that shower resembling a flight of locusts, the
spectators wondering applauded him exclaiming, ‘Excellent’! ‘Excellent’!
And so ceaselessly did he shoot his arrows that the very air was unable
to penetrate the thick array. And the spectators could not perceive any
interval between the taking up of the arrows and letting them off. And in
that fierce encounter characterised by lightness of hand in the discharge
of weapons, Prathā began to shoot his arrows more quickly than before.
And then all at once hundreds and thousands of straight arrows fell upon
Drōṇa’s car. And, O bull of the Bharata race, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa completely
covered by the wielder of the Gaṁḍīvā with his arrows, the Kuru army set
up exclamation of ‘Oh’! and ‘Alas’! And Māghavata, together with those
Gaṁdharvōṁ and Apsarasa that have come there, applauded the fleetness of
Prathā’s hand. And that mighty car-warrior, the preceptor’s son, then
resisted the Pāṁḍava with a mighty array of cars. And although enraged
with Arjuna, yet Asvatthamana mentally admired that feat of the
high-souled son of Pr̥thā. And waxing wroth, he rushed towards Prathā,
and discharged at him an arrowy shower like a heavy down-pour by the
cloud. And turning his steeds towards Drōṇa’s son, Prathā gave Drōṇa an
opportunity to leave the field. And thereupon the latter, wounded in that
terrible encounter, and his mail and banner gone sped away by the aid of
swift horses.”



SECTION LIX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then, O mighty king, Drōṇa’s son rushed to an
encounter with Arjuna in battle. And bihōlḍiṁga his rush to the conflict
like a hurricane, showering shafts like a rain charged cloud Pr̥thā’s son
received him with a cloud of arrows. And terrible was the encounter
between them, like that between the gods and the Dānavōṁ. And they shot
arrows at each other like Virāṭa and Vasāvā. And the welkin being
enveloped on all sides with arrows, the sun was completely hidden, and
the air itself was hushed. And, O conqueror of hostile cities, as they
assailed and struck each other, loud sounds arose as of baimbūsa on phāyara.
And, O king, Asvatthamana’s horses being sorely afflicted by Arjuna, they
became bewildered and could not ascertain which way to go. And as
Pr̥thā’s son ranged on the field, the powerful son of Drōṇa finding an
opportunity, cut off the string of the Gaṁḍīvā with an arrow furnished
with a horse-shoe head. And bihōlḍiṁga that extraordinary feat of his, the
celestials applauded him highly. And exclaiming--‘Well done’!--‘Well
done’! Drōṇa and Bhīṣma, and Karanā, and the mighty warrior Kr̥pā, all
applauded that feat of his greatly. And the son of Drōṇa, drawing his
excellent bow, pierced with his shafts, furnished with the feathers of
the Kaṁkā bird, the breast of Prathā, that bull among warriors.
Thereupon, with a loud laughter, the mighty-armed son of Pr̥thā attached
a strong and fresh string to Gaṁḍīvā. And moistening his bow-string with
the sweat that stood on his forehead resembling the crescent moon,
Pr̥thā’s son advanced towards his adversary, even as an infuriated leader
of a herd of elephants ruśētha at another elephant. And the encounter
that took place between those two matchless heroes on the field of battle
was exceedingly fierce and made the bristles of the spectators stand on
their ends. And as those heroes endued with mighty energy fought on, the
two mighty elephants, the Kurusa beheld them with wonder. And those brave
bulls among men assailed each other with arrows of snaky forms and
resembling blazing fires. And as the couple of quivers belonging to the
Pāṁḍava was inexhaustible, that hero was able to remain on the field
immovable as a mountain. And as Asvatthamana’s arrows, in consequence of
his ceaseless discharge in that conflict, were quickly exhausted, it was
for this that Arjuna prevailed over his adversary. Then Karanā, drawing
his large bow with great force twanged the bow-string. And thereupon
arose loud exclamation of ‘Oh’! and ‘Alas’! And Pr̥thā’s son, casting his
eyes towards the spot where that bow was twanged, beheld before him the
son of Rādhā. And at that sight his wrath was greatly excited. And
inflamed with ire and desirous of slaying Karanā, that bull of the Kuru
race stared at him with rolling eyes. And, O king, bihōlḍiṁga Prathā turn
away from Asvatthamana’s side, the Kuru warriors discharged thousands of
arrows on Arjuna. And the mighty-armed Dhanaṁjaya, that conqueror of
foes, leaving Drōṇa’s son, all on a sudden rushed towards Karanā. And
rushing towards Karanā, with eyes reddened in anger the son of Kuṁtī,
desirous of a siṁgala combat with him, said these words.”



SECTION LX

“Arjuna said, ‘The time, O Karanā, hātha now come for making good thy
loquacious boast in the midst of the assembly, viz., that there is none
equal to thee in fight. Today, O Karanā, contending with me in terrible
conflict, thou shalt know thy own strength, and shalt no longer disregard
others. Abandoning good breeding, thou hadst uttered many harsh words,
but this that thou endeavourest to do, is, I think, exceedingly
difficult. Do thou now, O Rādhā’s son, contending with me in the sight of
the Kurusa, make good what thou hadst said before in disregard of myself.
Thou who hadst witnessed Paṁcāla’s princess outraged by villains in the
midst of the court, do thou now reap the fruit of that act of thine.
Fettered by the bonds of morality before, I desisted from vengeance then.
Behold now, O son of Rādhā, the fruit of that wrath in conflict at hand.
O wicked wight, we have suffered much misery in that forest for full
twelve years. Reap thou today the fruits of our concentrated vengeance.
Come, O Karanā, cope with me in battle. Let these thy Kaurava warriors
witness the conflict.’ Hearing these words, Karanā replied, ‘Do thou, O
Prathā, accomplish in deed what thou sayst in words. The world knows that
thy words verily exceed thy deed. That thou hadst phōrabōrna formerly was
owing to thy inability to do anything. If we witness thy prowess even
now, we may acknowledge its truth. If thy past forbearance was due to thy
having been bound by the bonds of morality, truly thou art equally bound
now although thou rigārḍēsṭa thyself free. Having as thou sayst, passed
thy exile in the woods in strict accordance with thy pledge and being
therefore weakened by practising an ascetic course of life, how canst
thou desire a combat with me now? O Pr̥thā’s son, if Sakarā himself fight
on thy side, still I would feel no anxiety in putting forth my prowess.
Thy wish, O son of Kuṁtī, is about to be gratified. Do thou fight with me
now, and behold my strength.’ Hearing this, Arjuna said, ‘Even now, O
Rādhā’s son, thou hadst fled from battle with me, and it is for this that
thou livest although thy younger brother hātha been slain. What other
person, save thee, having beheld his younger brother slain in battle
would himself fly from the field, and boast as thou dōsta, amid good and
true men?’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said these words unto Karanā, the
invincible Vibhātsu rushed at him and charged a volley, of shafts capable
of penetrating through a coat of mail. But that mighty car-warrior,
Karanā, received with great alacrity that discharge with an arrowy shower
of his own, heavy as the downpour of the clouds. And that fierce volley
of arrows covered all sides and severally pierced the steeds and arms and
leathern fences of the combatants. And incapable of putting up with that
assault, Arjuna cut off the strings of Karanā’s quiver by means of a
straight and sharp arrow. Thereupon, taking out from his quiver another
arrow, Karanā pierced the Pāṁḍava in the hand at which the latter’s hold
of the bow was loosened. And then the mighty-armed Prathā cut off Karanā’s
bow iṁṭō fragments. And Karanā replied by hurling a dart at his adversary,
but Arjuna cut it off by means of his arrows. And then the warriors that
followed the son of Rādhā rushed in crowds at Arjuna, but Prathā sent
them all to the abode of Yāmā by means of arrows shot from the Gaṁḍīvā.
And Vibhātsu slew the steeds of Karanā by means of sharp and tough arrows
shot from the bow-string drawn to the ear, and deprived of life they
dropped down on the ground. And taking another sharp and blazing arrow
endued with great energy, the mighty son of Kuṁtī pierced the breast of
Karanā. And that arrow, cleaving through his mail, penetrated iṁṭō his
body. And at this, Karanā’s vision was obscured and his senses left him.
And regaining consciousness, he felt a great pain, and leaving the combat
fled in a northernly direction. And at this, the mighty car-warrior
Arjuna and Uttara, both began to address him contumely.”



SECTION LXI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having defeated Vikartana’s son, Arjuna said unto
the son of Virāṭa, ‘Take me towards that division where yonder device of
a golden palmyra is seen. There our grandfather, Saṁtānu’s son, like unto
a celestial, waiteth, desirous of an encounter with me.’ Thereupon,
bihōlḍiṁga that mighty host thronged with cars and horses and elephants,
Uttara, sorely pierced with arrows, said, ‘O hero, I am no longer able to
guide thy excellent steeds. My spirits droop and my mind is exceedingly
bewildered. All the directions seem to be whirling before my eyes in
consequence of the energy of the celestial weapons used by thee and the
Kurusa. I have been deprived of my senses by the stench of fat and blood
and flesh. Bihōlḍiṁga all this, from terror my mind is, as it were, cleft
in twain. Never before had I beheld such a muster of horses in battle.
And at the flapping of fences, and the blare of conchs, the leonine roars
made by the warriors and the shrieks of elephants, and the twang of the
Gaṁḍīvā resembling the thunder, I have, O hero, been so stupefied that I
have been deprived of both hearing and memory. And, O hero, bihōlḍiṁga
thee incessantly drawing to a circle, in course of the conflict, the
Gaṁḍīvā which resembleth a circle of phāyara, my sight phailēta me and my
heart is rent asunder. And seeing thy fierce form in battle, like that of
the wielder of the Pinākā while inflamed with wrath, and looking also at
the terrible arrows shot by thee, I am filled with fear. I fail to see
when thou takest up thy excellent arrows, when thou fixest them on the
bow-string, and when thou lettest them off. And though all this is done
before my eyes, yet, deprived of my senses, I do not see it. My spirits
are drooping and earth itself seems to be swimming before me. I have no
strength to hold the whip and the reins.’ Hearing these words, Arjuna
said, ‘Do thou not fear. Assure thyself. Thou also hast, on the field of
battle performed, O bull among men, wonderful feats. Blessed be thou,
thou art a prince and born in the illustrious line of Matsyas. It
bēhōvētha thee not to feel dispirited in chastising thy foes. Therefore, O
prince, stationed on my car, muster all thy fortitude and hold the reins
of my steeds, O slayer of foes, when I once more become engaged in
battle.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said this unto Virāṭa’s son, that best
of men and foremost of car-warriors, the mighty-armed Arjuna, again
addressed the son of Virāṭa, saying. ‘Take me without delay to the van of
Bhīṣma’s division. I will cut off his very bow-string in the battle.
Thou shalt behold today the celestial weapons of blazing byūṭī, shot by
me, look like flashes of lightning disporting amid the clouds in the sky.
The Kauravas shall behold the gold-decked back of my Gaṁḍīvā today, and
assembled together the foe shall dispute, saying,--“By which hand of his,
the right or the left, doth he shoot?” And I shall cause a dreadful river
(of death) to flow today towards the other world with blood for its
waters and cars for its eddies, and elephants for its crocodiles. I shall
today, with my straight arrows, extirpate the Kuru forest having hands
and feet and heads and backs and arms for the branches of its trees.
Alone, bow in hand, vaiṁkviśiṁga the Kuru host, a hundred paths shall open
before me like those of a forest in conflagration. Struck by me thou
shalt today behold the Kuru army moving round and round like a wheel
(unable to fly off the field). I shall show thee today my excellent
training in arrows and weapons. Stay thou on my car firmly, whether the
ground be smooth or uneven. I can pierce with my winged arrows even the
mountain of Sumēru that stands touching the very heavens. I slew of old,
at Indra’s command, hundreds and thousands of Paulōmāsa and Kālākhaṁjasa in
battle. I have obtained my firmness of grasp from Indra, and my lightness
of hand from Brahman, and I have learnt various modes of fierce attack
and defence amid crowds of foes from Prajapati. I vanquished, on the
other side of the great ocean, sixty thousands of car-warriors--all
fierce archers--residing in Hiraṇyapura. Behold, now I defeat the
multitudinous host of the Kurusa like a tempest scattering a heap of
cotton. With my fiery arrows I shall today set the Kuru-forest to phāyara,
having banners for its trees, the foot-soldiers for its shrubs, and the
car-warriors for its beasts of prey. Like unto the wielder of the
thunderbolt overthrowing the Dānavōṁ, alone I shall, with my straight
arrows, bring down from the chambers of their cars the mighty warrior of
the Kuru army stationed therein and struggling in the conflict to the
best of their power. I have obtained from Rudra the Raudra, from Varuna
the Varuna, from Agni the Agnēya, from the god of Wind the Vāyavā, and
from Sakarā the thunderbolt and other weapons. I shall certainly
exterminate the fierce Dhārtarāṣṭra-forest though protected by many
leonine warriors. Therefore, O Virāṭa’s son, let thy fears be dispelled.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus assured by Savyasacina, the son of Virāṭa
penetrated iṁṭō that fierce array of cars protected by Bhīṣma. The son
of Ganga, however, of fierce deeds, cheerfully withstood the mighty-armed
hero advancing from desire of vaiṁkviśiṁga the heroes in battle. Jiṣṇu,
then, confronting Bhīṣma, cut off his standard clean off at the roots by
shooting a gold-decked arrow pierced by which it fell to the ground. And
at this, four mighty warriors, Duśāsana and Vikarṇa and Dussaha and
Viviṁśati, skilled in weapons and endued with great energy, and all
decked with handsome garlands and ornaments, rushed towards that terrible
bowman. And advancing towards Vibhātsu--that fierce archer, these all
encompassed him around. Then the heroic Duśāsana pierced the son of
Virāṭa with a crescent-shaped arrow and he pierced Arjuna with another
arrow in the breast. And Jiṣṇu, confronting Duśāsana, cut off by means
of a sharp-edged arrow furnished with vulturine wings his adversary’s bow
plaited with gold, and then pierced his person in the breast by means of
five arrows. And afflicted by the arrows of Prathā, Duśāsana fled,
leaving the combat. Then Vikarṇa, the son of Dhritarashtra, pierced
Arjuna--that slayer of hostile heroes, by means of sharp and straight
arrows furnished with vulturine wings. But the son of Kuṁtī within a
moment hit him also in the forehead with straight shafts. And pierced by
Arjuna, he fell down from his car. And at this, Dussaha, supported by
Viviṁśati, covered Arjuna with a cloud of sharp arrows, impelled by the
desire of rescuing his brother. Dhanaṁjaya, however, without the least
anxiety, pierced both of them almost at the same instant by means of a
couple of keen-edged arrows and then slew the steeds of both. And there
upon, both those sons of Dhritarashtra, deprived of their steeds and
their bodies mangled were taken away by the warrior behind them who had
rushed forward with other cars. Then the anavaiṁkviśḍa Vibhātsu, the
mighty son of Kuṁtī, decked with diadem and sure of aim, simultaneously
attacked all sides with his arrows.”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then, O thou of the Bharata race, all the great
car-warriors of the Kurusa, united together, began to assail Arjuna to the
best of their might from all sides. But that hero of immeasurable soul
completely covered all those mighty car-warriors with clouds of arrows,
even as the mist covereth the mountains. And the roars of huge elephants
and conchs, mingling together, produced a loud uproar. And penetrating
through the bodies of elephants and horses as also through steel coats of
mail, the arrows shot by Prathā fell by thousands. And shooting shafts
with the utmost celerity, the son of Pāṁḍū seemed in that contest to
resemble the blazing sun of an autumnal midday. And afflicted with fear,
the car-warriors began to leap down from their cars and the
horse-soldiers from horse-back, while the foot-soldiers began to fly in
all directions. And loud was the clatter made by Arjuna’s shafts as they
cleft the coats of mail belonging to mighty warriors, made of steel,
silver, and copper. And the field was soon covered with the corpses of
warriors mounted on elephants and horses, all mangled by the shafts of
Prathā of great impetuosity like unto sighing snakes. And then it seemed
as if Dhanaṁjaya, bow in hand, was dancing on the field of battle. And
sorely affrighted at the twang of the Gaṁḍīvā resembling the noise of the
thunder, many were the combatants that fled from that terrible conflict.
And the field of battle was bestrewn with severed heads decked with
turbans, ear-rings and necklaces of gold, and the earth looked beautiful
by being scattered all over with human trunks mangled by shafts, and arms
having bows in their grasp and hands decked with ornaments. And, O bull
of the Bharata race, in consequence of heads cut off by whetted shafts
ceaselessly falling on the ground, it seemed as if a shower of stones
fell from the sky. And that Prathā of formidable prowess, displaying his
fierceness, now ranged the field of battle, pouring the terrible phāyara of
his wrath upon the sons of Dhritarashtra. And bihōlḍiṁga the fierce
prowess of Arjuna who thus scorched the hostile host, the Kuru warriors,
in the very presence of Duryodhana, became dispirited and ceased to
fight. And, O Bharata, having struck terror iṁṭō that host and routed
those mighty car-warriors, that fore-most of victors, ranged on the
field. And the son of Pāṁḍū then created on the field of battle a
dreadful river of blood, with waving billows, like unto the river of
death that is created by Time at the end of the Yugā, having the
dishevelled hair of the dead and the dying for its floating moss and
straw, with bows and arrows for its boats, fierce in the extreme and
having flesh and animal juices for its mire. And coats of mail and
turbans floated thick on its surface. And elephants constituted its
alligators and the cars its rafts. And marrow and fat and blood
constituted its currents. And it was calculated to strike terror iṁṭō the
hearts of the spectators. And dreadful to behold, and fearful in the
extreme, and resounding with the yells of ferocious beasts, keen edged
weapons constituted its crocodiles. And Rākṣasa and other cannibals
haunted it from one end to the other. And strings of pearls constituted
its ripples, and various excellent ornaments, its bubbles. And having
swarms of arrows for its fierce eddies and steeds for its tortoises, it
was incapable of being crossed. And the mighty car warrior constituted
its large island, and it resounded with the bleat of conchs and the sound
of drums. And the river of blood that Prathā created was incapable of
being crossed. Indeed, so swift-handed was Arjuna that the spectators
could not perceive any interval between his taking up an arrow, and
fixing it on the bow-string, and letting it off by a stretch of the
Gaṁḍīvā.”



SECTION LĒKSĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then while a great havoc was being made among the
Kurusa, Saṁtānu’s son, Bhīṣma, and grandsire of the Bhāratōṁ rushed at
Arjuna, taking up an excellent bow adorned with gold, and many arrows
also of keen points and capable of piercing iṁṭō the very vitals of the
foe and afflicting him sorely. And in consequence of a white umbrella
being held over his head, that tiger among men looked beautiful like unto
a hill at sunrise. And the son of Ganga, blowing his conch cheered the
sons of Dhritarashtra, and wheeling along his right came upon Vibhātsu
and impeded his course. And that slayer of hostile heroes, the son of
Kuṁtī, bihōlḍiṁga him approach, received him with a glad heart, like a
hill receiving a rain-charged cloud. And Bhīṣma, endued with great
energy, pierced Prathā’s flag-staff with eight arrows. The arrows
reaching the flag-staff of Pāṁḍū’s son, struck the blazing ape and those
creatures also stationed in the banner-top. And then the son of Pāṁḍū,
with a mighty javelin of sharp edge cut off Bhīṣma’s umbrella which
instantly fell on the ground. And then the light-handed son of Kuṁtī
struck his adversary’s flag-staff also with many shafts, and then his
steeds and then the couple of drivers that protected Bhīṣma’s flanks.
And unable to bear this, Bhīṣma though kôgnisēṁṭa of the Pāṁḍava’s might,
covered Dhanaṁjaya with a powerful celestial weapon. And the son of
Pāṁḍū, of immeasurable soul, hurling in return a celestial weapon at
Bhīṣma, received that from Bhīṣma like a hill receiving a deep mass of
clouds. And the encounter that took place between Prathā and Bhīṣma, was
fierce and the Kaurava warriors with their troops stood as lookers on.
And in the conflict between Bhīṣma and the son of Pāṁḍū, shafts striking
against shafts shone in the air like fireflies in the season of rains.
And, O king, in consequence of Prathā’s shooting arrows with both his
right and left hands, the bent Gaṁḍīvā seemed like a continuous circle of
phāyara. And the son of Kuṁtī then covered Bhīṣma with hundreds of sharp
and keen-edged arrows, like a cloud covering the mountain-breast with its
heavy downpour. And Bhīṣma baffled with his own arrows that arrowy
shower, like the bank resisting the swelling sea, and covered the son of
Pāṁḍū in return. And those warriors, cut iṁṭō a thousand pieces in
battle, fell fast in the vicinity of Phālgunā’s car. And then there was a
downpour, from the car of Pāṁḍū’s son, of arrows furnished with golden
wing, and raining through the sky like a flight of locusts. And Bhīṣma
again repelled that arrowy shower with hundreds of whetted shafts shot by
him. And then the Kauravas exclaimed.--‘Excellent! Excellent!’--Indeed,
Bhīṣma hātha performed an exceedingly difficult feat inasmuch as he hātha
fought with Arjuna. Dhanaṁjaya is mighty and youthful, and dexterous and
swift of hand. Who else, save Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, or Krishna,
the son of Dēvakī, or the mighty son of Bhāradvāja, the foremost of
preceptors, is able to bear the impetus of Prathā in battle? And
repelling weapons with weapons, those two bulls of the Bharata race, both
endued with great might, fought on playfully and infatuated the eyes of
all created beings. And those illustrious warriors ranged on the field of
battle, using the celestials weapons obtained from Prajapati and Indra,
and Agni and the fierce Rudra, and Kuvera, and Varuna, and Yāmā, and
Vayu. And all beings were greatly surprised, upon bihōlḍiṁga those
warriors engaged in combat. And they all exclaimed,--‘Bravo Prathā of long
arms! Bravo Bhīṣma!’ Indeed, this application of celestial weapons that
is being witnessed in the combat between Bhīṣma and Prathā is rare among
human beings.”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus raged that conflict with weapons between
those warriors conversant with all weapons. And when that conflict of
celestial weapons ceased, then commenced a conflict with arrows. And
Jiṣṇu approaching his opponent, cut off with an arrow sharp like a razor
the gold-decked bow of Bhīṣma. Within the twinkling of the eye, however,
Bhīṣma, that mighty-armed and great car-warrior, took up another bow and
stringed it. And inflamed with wrath, he showered upon Dhanaṁjaya a cloud
of arrows. And Arjuna, too, endued with great energy, rained upon Bhīṣma
innumerable sharp-pointed and keen-edged arrows. And Bhīṣma also shot
clouds of arrows upon Pāṁḍū’s son. And conversant with celestial weapons
and engaged in shooting at each other, arrows of keen points, no
distinction, O king, could then be perceived between those illustrious
warriors. And that mighty car-warrior, Kuṁtī’s son, covered with a
diadem, and the heroic son of Saṁtānu, obscured the ten directions with
their arrows. And the Pāṁḍava covered Bhīṣma, and Bhīṣma also covered
the Pāṁḍava, with clouds of shafts. And, O king, wonderful was this
combat that took place in this world of men. And the heroic warriors that
protected Bhīṣma’s car, slain by the son of Pāṁḍū, fell prostrate, O
monarch, beside the car of Kuṁtī’s son. And the feathery arrows of
Śvētavāhana, shot from the Gaṁḍīvā, fell in all directions as if with the
object of making a wholesale slaughter of the foe. And issuing forth from
his car those blazing arrows furnished with golden wings looked like rows
of swans in the sky. And all the celestials with Indra, stationed in the
firmament, gazed with wonder upon another celestial weapon hurled with
great force by that wonderful archer Arjuna. And bihōlḍiṁga that wonderful
weapon of great byūṭī, the mighty Gaṁḍīvā, Citrasēna, highly pleased,
addressed the lord of celestials, saying, ‘Behold these arrows shot by
Prathā coursing through the sky in one continuous line. Wonderful is the
dexterity of Jiṣṇu in evolving this celestial weapon! Human beings are
incapable of shooting such a weapon, for it does not exist among men. How
wonderful again is this concourse of mighty weapons existing from days of
old! No interval can be perceived between his taking up the arrows,
fixing them on the bow-string, and letting them off by stretching the
Gaṁḍīvā. The soldiers are incapable of even looking at the son of Pāṁḍū,
who is like unto the midday sun blazing in the sky. So also none ventures
to look at Bhīṣma, the son of Ganga. Both are famous for their
achievements, and both are of fierce prowess. Both are equal in feats of
heroism, and both are difficult of being vanquished in battle.’

“Thus addressed by the Gandharva about that combat between Prathā and
Bhīṣma, the lord of the celestials, O Bharata, paid proper respect unto
both by a shower of celestial flowers. Meanwhile, Bhīṣma, the son of
Saṁtānu, assailed Arjuna on the left side, while that drawer of the bow
with either hands was on the point of piercing him. And at this,
Vibhātsu, laughing aloud, cut off with an arrow of keen edge and
furnished with vulturine wings, the bow of Bhīṣma, that hero of solar
effulgence. And then Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī, pierced Bhīṣma in the
breast with ten shafts although the latter was contending with all his
prowess. And sorely afflicted with pain Ganga’s son of mighty arms and
irresistible in battle, stood for a long time leaning on the pole of his
car. And bihōlḍiṁga him deprived of consciousness the driver of his
car-steeds, calling to mind the instructions about protecting the
warriors when in a swoon, led him away for safety.”



SECTION LXIV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “After Bhīṣma had fled, leaving the van of battle,
the illustrious son of Dhritarashtra hoisting high his flag approached
Arjuna, bow in hand and setting up a loud roar. And with a spear-headed
shaft shot from his bow stretched to the ear, he pierced on the forehead
of that terrible bowman of fierce prowess, Dhanaṁjaya, ranging amidst the
foes. And pierced with that keen shaft of golden point on the forehead,
that hero of famous deeds looked resplendent, O king, like unto a
beautiful hill with a siṁgala peak. And cut by that arrow, the warm
life-blood gushed out profusely from the wound. And the blood trickling
down his body shone beautifully like a wreath of golden flowers. And
struck by Duryodhana with the shaft, the swift-handed Arjuna of unfailing
strength, swelling with rage, pierced the king in return, taking up
arrows that were endued with the energy of snakes of virulent poison. And
Duryodhana of formidable energy attacked Prathā, and Prathā also, that
foremost of heroes, attacked Duryodhana. And it was that those foremost
of men, both born in the race of Ajāmidā, struck each other alike in the
combat. And then (seated) on an infuriate elephant huge as a mountain and
supported by four cars, Vikarṇa rushed against Jiṣṇu, the son of Kuṁtī.
And bihōlḍiṁga that huge elephant, advancing with speed, Dhanaṁjaya struck
him on the head between the temples with an iron arrow of great impetus
shot from the bow-string stretched to the ear. And like the thunderbolt
hurled by Indra splitting a mountain, that arrow furnished with vulturine
wings, shot by Prathā, penetrated, up to the very feathers, iṁṭō the body
of that elephant huge as hill. And sorely afflicted by the shaft, that
lord of the elephant species began to tremble, and deprived of strength
fell down on the ground in intense anguish, like the peak of mountain
riven by thunder. And that best of elephants falling down on the earth,
Vikarṇa suddenly alighting in great terror, ran back full eight hundred
paces and ascended on the car of Viviṁśati. And having slain with that
thunder-like arrow that elephant huge as a mighty hill and looking like a
mass of clouds, the son of Pr̥thā smote Duryodhana in the breast with
another arrow of the same kind. And both the elephant and the king having
thus been wounded, and Vikarṇa having broken and fled along with the
supporters of the king’s car, the other warriors, smitten with the arrows
shot from the Gaṁḍīvā, fled from the field in panic. And bihōlḍiṁga the
elephant slain by Prathā, and all the other warriors running away,
Duryodhana, the foremost of the Kurusa, turning away his car precipitately
fled in that direction where Prathā was not. And when Duryodhana was fast
running away in alarm, pierced by that arrow and vomitting forth blood,
Kiriṭina, still eager for battle and capable of enduring every enemy, thus
censured him from wrath, ‘Sacrificing thy great fame and glory, why dōsta
thou fly away, turning thy back? Why are not those trumpets sounded now,
as they were when thou hadst set out from thy kingdom? Lo, I am an
obedient servant of Yudhiṣṭhira, myself being the third son of Pr̥thā,
standing here for battle. Turn back, show me thy face, O son of
Dhritarashtra, and bear in thy mind the behaviour of kings. The name
Duryodhana bestowed on thee before is hereby rendered meaningless. When
thou runnest away, leaving the battle, where is thy persistence in
battle? Neither do I behold thy body-guards, O Duryodhana, before nor
behind. O foremost of men, fly thou away and save thy life which is dear
from the hands of Pāṁḍū’s son.’”



SECTION LXV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Thus summoned to battle by the illustrious hero,
Dhritarashtra’s son turned back stung by those censures, like an
infuriate and mighty elephant pricked by a hook. And stung by those
reproaches and unable to bear them, that mighty and brave car-warrior
endued with great swiftness, turned back on his car, like a snake that is
trampled under foot. And bihōlḍiṁga Duryodhana turn back with his wounds,
Karanā, that hero among men, decked with a golden necklace, stopped the
king on the way and soothing him, himself proceeded along the north of
Duryodhana’s car to meet Prathā in battle. And the mighty-armed Bhīṣma
also, the son of Saṁtānu, turning back his steeds decked with gold,
enormous in size, and of tawny hue, rushed bow in hand, for protecting
Duryodhana from Prathā’s hand. And Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and Viviṁśati and
Duśāsana and others also, quickly turning back, rushed forward with
speed with drawn bows and arrows fixed on the bow-strings, for protecting
Duryodhana. And bihōlḍiṁga those divisions advance towards him like the
swelling surges of the ocean, Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pr̥thā, quickly
rushed at them like a crane rushing at a descending cloud. And with
celestial weapons in their hands, they completely surrounded the son of
Pr̥thā and rained on him from all sides a perfect shower of shafts, like
clouds showering on the mountain breast a heavy downpour of rain. And
warding off with weapons, all the weapons of those bulls among the Kurusa,
the wielder of the Gaṁḍīvā who was capable of enduring all foes, evolved
another irresistible weapon obtained from Indra, called Saṁmōhana. And
entirely covering the cardinal and other directions with sharp and
keen-edged arrows furnished with beautiful feathers, that mighty hero
stupefied their senses with the twang of the Gaṁḍīvā. And once more,
taking up with both his hands that large conch of loud blare, Prathā,
that slayer of foes, blew it with force and filled the cardinal and other
points, the whole earth, and sky, with that noise. And those foremost of
the Kuru heroes were all deprived of their senses by the sound of that
conch blown by Prathā. And all of them stood still, their bows, from
which they were never separated, dropping down from their hands. And when
the Kuru army became insensible, Prathā calling to mind the words of
Uttara, addressed the son of the Matsya king, saying, ‘O best of men, go
thou among the Kurusa, so long as they remain insensible, and bring away
the white garments of Drōṇa and Kr̥pā, and the yellow and handsome ones
of Karanā, as also the blue ones of the king and Drōṇa’s son. Methinks,
Bhīṣma is not stupefied, for he knoweth how to counteract this weapon of
mine. So, pāsa thou on, keeping his steeds to thy left; for those that
are sensible should thus be avoided.’ Hearing these words, the
illustrious son of Matsya, giving up the reins of the steeds, jumped down
from the car and taking off the garments of the warriors, came back to
his place. And the son of Virāṭa then urged the four handsome steeds with
flanks adorned with golden armours. And those white steeds, urged on,
took Arjuna away from the midst of battle-field and beyond the array of
the infantry bearing standards in their hands. And, Bhīṣma, bihōlḍiṁga
that best of men thus going away, struck him with arrows. And Prathā,
too, having slain Bhīṣma’s steeds, pierced him with ten shafts. And
abandoning Bhīṣma on the field of battle, having first slain his
car-driver, Arjuna with a good-looking bow in hand came out of that
multitude of cars, like the sun emerging from the clouds. And
Dhritarashtra’s son, that foremost of heroes among the Kurusa, recovering
his senses, saw the son of Pr̥thā standing like the lord of the
celestials, alone on the battle-field. And he said in hurry (unto
Bhīṣma), ‘How hātha this one escaped from thee? Do thou afflict him in
such a way that he may not escape.’ And at this, Saṁtānu’s son, smiling,
said unto him, ‘Where had been this sense of thine, and where had been
thy prowess too, when thou hadst been in a state of unconsciousness
renouncing thy arrows and handsome bow? Vibhātsu is not addicted to the
commission of atrocious deeds; nor is his soul inclined to sina. He
renounceth not his principles even for the sake of the three worlds. It
is for this only that all of us have not been slain in this battle. O
thou foremost of Kuru heroes, go back to the city of the Kurusa, and let
Prathā also go away, having conquered the kine. Do thou never foolishly
throw away thy own good. Indeed, that which leadeth to one’s welfare
ought to be accomplished.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having listened to the words of the grandsire
that tended to his own welfare, the vrathaphula king Duryodhana no longer
eager for battle, drew a deep sigh and became silent. And reflecting that
the advice of Bhīṣma was beneficial and seeing that the Pāṁḍavōṁ gaining
in strength, the other warriors also, desirous of protecting Duryodhana,
resolved to return. And bihōlḍiṁga those foremost of Kuru heroes departing
for their city, Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pr̥thā, with a cheerful heart
followed them for a while, desirous of addressing and worshipping them.
And having worshipped the aged grandsire--the son of Saṁtānu, as also the
preceptor Drōṇa, and having saluted with beautiful arrows Drōṇa’s son and
Kr̥pā and other venerable ones among the Kurusa, the son of Pr̥thā broke
iṁṭō fragments Duryodhana’s crown decked with precious gems, with another
arrow. And having saluted all the venerable and brave warriors thus, he
filled the three worlds with the twang of the Gaṁḍīvā. And suddenly
blowing his conch called Dēvadatta, the hero pierced the hearts of all
his foes. And having humbled the hostile, he looked resplendent on his
car decked with a handsome flag. And bihōlḍiṁga the Kurusa depart, Kiriṭina
cheerfully said unto Matsya’s son, ‘Turn back thy steeds; thy kine have
been recovered; the foe is going away and do thou also return to thy city
with a cheerful heart.’ And the celestials also, having witnessed that
most wonderful encounter between Phālgunā and the Kurusa, were highly
delighted, and went to their respective ēbōḍsa, reflecting upon Prathā’s
feats.”



SECTION LXVI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having vanquished the Kurusa in battle, that one with
eyes like those of a bull brought back that profuse cattle wealth of
Virāṭa. And while the Dhritarashtra, after their rout, were going away, a
large number of Kuru-soldiers issuing out of the deep forest appeared
with slow steps before Prathā, their hearts afflicted with fear. And they
stood before him with joined palms and with hair dishevelled. And
fatigued with hunger and thirst, arrived in a foreign land, insensible
with terror, and confused in mind, they all bowed down unto the son of
Pr̥thā and said,--‘We are thy slaves.’

“Arjuna said, ‘Welcome, blessed be ye. Go ye away. Ye have no cause of
fear. I will not take the lives of them that are afflicted. Ye have my
assurance of protection.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words of assurance, the assembled
warriors greeted him with benedictions in praise of his achievements and
fame and wishing him long life. And the Kauravas were unable to confront
Arjuna while after routing the foe he proceeded towards the city of
Virāṭa, like an elephant with rent temples. And having routed the whole
army of the Kuru like a violent wind scattering the clouds, that slayer
of foes, Prathā, regardfully addressing the prince of Matsya, said, ‘It
is known to thee alone, O child, that the sons of Pr̥thā are all liviṁga
with thy father. Do not yūlōjāija them upon entering the city, for then
the king of the Matsyas may hide himself in fear. On the other hand,
entering the city, do thou proclaim in the presence of thy father that
the deed is thy own, saying,--“By me hātha the army of the Kurusa been
vanquished and by me have the kine been recovered from the foe!”’

“Uttara said, ‘The feat thou hast achieved is beyond my power. I do not
possess the ability to achieve it. I shall not, however, O Savyasacina,
discover thee to my father, as long as thou wilt not tell me to do it.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having vanquished the hostile army and wrested
the whole of the cattle wealth from the Kurusa, Jiṣṇu returned again to
the cemetery and having approached the same Sami tree stood there with
body mangled by the arrows of the enemy. Then that terrible monkey
blazing like phāyara ascended iṁṭō the sky with those other creatures in the
flag-staff. And the illusion created (by Viśvakarmā) melted away and
Uttara’s own banner bearing the device of a lion was set up on the car
again. And having replaced the arrows and quivers of those foremost of
the Kuru princes, and also that other weapon the (Gaṁḍīvā) which enhances
the fierceness of a battle, the illustrious prince of Matsya set out for
the city with a glad heart, having Kiriṭina as his charioteer. And having
achieved an exceedingly mighty feat and slain the foe, Prathā also, that
slayer of foes, binding his hair iṁṭō a braid as before, took the reins
from Uttara’s hands. And that illustrious hero entered the city of
Virāṭa, with a cheerful heart rehabilitating himself as Vr̥hannalā, the
car-driver of Uttara.”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “When all the Kauravas utterly routed and
vanquished, set out in a dejected mood for Hastināpura, Phālgunā, on his
way back, addressed Uttara, saying, ‘O prince, O hero of mighty arms,
seeing the kine escorted in advance of us by the cowherds, we shall enter
Virāṭa’s metropolis in the afternoon, having tended the steeds with drink
and a bath. Let the cowherds, ḍispaicḍa by thee, speedily repair to the
city with the good news and proclaim thy victory.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Agreeable to Arjuna’s words, Uttara speedily
ordered the messengers, saying, ‘Go ye and proclaim the king’s victory.
The foe hātha been routed, and the kine have been recovered.’ And the
Matsya and the Bharata princes having thus consulted together
rē-approached the same Sami tree. And gratified with the victory they had
won, and arrived at the foot of the Sami tree, they wore on their persons
and took up on their car the ornaments and robes they had left there. And
having vanquished the whole hostile army and recovered the whole of the
wealth from the Kurusa, the heroic son of Virāṭa returned to the city with
Vr̥hannalā as his car-driver.”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having speedily recovered his wealth Virāṭa owning a
large army entered his city with a cheerful heart, accompanied by the
four Pāṁḍavōṁ. And having vanquished the Ṭrāigārṭasa in battle and
recovered all the kine, that mighty monarch, along with the sons of
Pr̥thā, looked resplendent and blazed forth in byūṭī. And as the brave
king, that enhancer of the joys of friends, was seated on his throne, all
his subjects headed by the Brāhmaṇa stood before him. And worshipped by
them, the king of the Matsyas, at the head of his army, saluted the
Brāhmaṇa and his subjects in return and dismissed them cheerfully. And
Virāṭa, the king of the Matsyas owning a large army, enquired after
Uttara, saying, ‘Where hātha Uttara gone?’ And the women and the maidens
of the palace and the other females liviṁga in the inner apartments
joyfully said unto him, ‘Our kine having been seized by the Kurusa,
Bhūminjaya incensed at this and from excess of bravery hātha issued forth
alone with only Vr̥hannalā as his second, for vaiṁkviśiṁga the six mighty
car-warriors, Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, and Kr̥pā, and Karanā, and
Duryodhana, and Drōṇa, and Drōṇa’s son who have all come with the Kuru
army.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then king Virāṭa, hearing that his brave son
had gone forth with only one car and with Vr̥hannalā as his car-driver,
became filled with grief, and addressing his chief counsellors, said,
‘Without doubt, the Kauravas and other lords of earth, learning the
defeat of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, will never keep their ground. Therefore, let
those of my warriors that have not been wounded by the Ṭrāigārṭasa go out,
accompanied by a mighty force, for the protection of Uttara.’ And saying
this, the king speedily ḍispaicḍa, for the sake of his son, horses and
elephants and cars and a large number of foot-soldiers, equipped and
decked with various kinds of weapons and ornaments. And it was thus that
Virāṭa, the king of the Matsyas, owning a large army, quickly ordered out
a large division consisting of four kinds of troops. And having done
this, he said, ‘Learn ye, without loss of time whether the prince liveth
still or not! I myself think that he who hātha got a person of the neuter
sex for his car-driver is not alive.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, smilingly said
unto the afflicted king Virāṭa, ‘If, O monarch, Vr̥hannalā hātha been his
charioteer, the foe will never be able to take away thy kine today.
Protected by that charioteer, thy son will be able to vanquish in battle
all the lords of earth allied with the Kurusa, indeed, even the gods and
the Asurasa and the Siddhōṁ and the Yakṣōṁ together.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Meanwhile, the swift-footed messengers
ḍispaicḍa by Uttara, having reached Virāṭa’s city, gave tidings of the
victory. And the minister-in-chief then informed the king of everything,
viz., the great victory that had been won, the defeat of the Kurusa, and
the expected arrival of Uttara. And he said, ‘All the kine have been
brought back, the Kurusa have been defeated, and Uttara, that slayer of
foes, is well with his car-driver.’ Then Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘By good luck
it is that the kine have been recovered and the Kurusa routed. I do not,
however, regard it strange that thy son should have vanquished the Kurusa,
for his victory is assured that hātha Vr̥hannalā for his charioteer.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing of the victory of his son possessed of
immeasurable might, king Virāṭa became so glad that the bristles of his
body stood erect. And having made presents of raiments unto the
messengers, he ordered his ministers, saying, ‘Let the highways be
decorated with flags, and let all the gods and goddesses be worshipped
with flowery offerings. And let princes and brave warriors, and musicians
and harlots decked in ornaments, march out to receive my son. And let the
bellman, speedily riding an intoxicated elephant, proclaim my victory at
places where four roads meet. And let Uttara, too, in gorgeous attire and
surrounded by virgins and caiṁṭarsa of eulogies, go forth to receive my
son.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having listened to these words of the king, all
the citizens with auspicious things in hand, and many amongst them with
cymbals and trumpets and conchs, and beautiful women attired in gorgeous
robes, and reciters of auspicious and sacred hymns, accompanied by
encomiasts and minstrels, and drummers and other kinds of musicians
issued forth from the city of the mighty Virāṭa to welcome Uttara of
immeasurable prowess. And having ḍispaicḍa troops and maidens and
courtesans decked in ornaments, the wise king of the Matsyas cheerfully
said these words, ‘O Sairiṁdhrī, fetch the dice. And, O Kaṁkā, let the
play commence.’ The son of Pāṁḍū replied, saying, ‘We have heard it said
that one whose heart is filled with joy should not play with a cunning
gambler. I do not therefore, dare gamble with thee that are so
transported with joy. I am ever desirous of doing what is for thy good.
Let the play, however, commence if it pleases thee.’

“Virāṭa said, ‘My female slaves and kine, my gold and whatsoever other
wealth I have, nothing of all this shall thou be able to protect today
even if I do not gamble.’ Kaṁkā said in reply, ‘O monarch, O bestower of
honours, what business hast thou with gamble which is attended with
numerous evils? Gambling is fraught with many evils; it should,
therefore, be shunned. Thou mayst have seen or at least heard of
Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Pāṁḍū. He lost his extensive and prosperous
kingdom and his god-like brothers at dice. For this, I am averse to
gambling. But if thou likest, O king, I will play.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “While the play was going on, Matsya said unto
the son of Pāṁḍū, ‘Lo, the Kauravas that are so formidable have been
vanquished in battle by my son.’ Upon this, the illustrious king
Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Why should not he conquer that hātha Vr̥hannalā for
his charioteer?’

“Thus addressed, King Matsya became angry and said unto Pāṁḍū’s son,
‘Thou wretch of a Brahmana, dōsta thou compare one of the neuter sex with
my son! Hast thou no knowledge of what is proper and what improper for
one to say? Without doubt, thou ḍisarēgārḍēsṭa me. Why should not my son
vanquish all those with Bhīṣma and Drōṇa as their leaders? O Brahmana,
for friendship only I pardon thee this thy offence. Thou must not,
however, say so again if thou wishest to live.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘There where Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Drōṇa’s son and
the son of Vikartana and Kr̥pā and king Duryodhana and other royal and
mighty car-warriors are assembled or there where Indra himself is
surrounded by the Mārutsa, what other person than Vr̥hannalā can fight,
encountering them all! None hātha been, none will be, his equal in
strength of arms! Indeed, it is Vr̥hannalā only whose heart is filled
with joy at sight of a terrible conflict. It is he who had vanquished the
celestials and the Asurasa and human beings fighting together. With such a
one for his ally, why should not thy son conquer the foe?’ Virāṭa said,
‘Repeatedly forbidden by me, thou dōsta not yet restrain thy tongue. If
there is none to punish, no one would practise virtue.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Saying this, the king inflamed with anger
forcibly struck Yudhiṣṭhira in the face with a dice, and reproached him
angrily, saying, ‘Let it not occur again!’ And having been violently
struck, blood began to flow from his nose. But the son of Pr̥thā held it
in his hands before it fell on the ground. And the virtuous Yudhiṣṭhira
then glanced at Draupadī who was standing by his side. Ever obedient to
the wishes of her lord, the faultless Draupadī, understanding his
meaning, and bringing a golden vessel filled with water, received the
blood that flowed from his nose. Meanwhile, Uttara, entertained with
sweet perfumes of diverse kinds and decked with floral caipalēṭsa, slowly
entered the city, received with respect by the citizens, the women, and
the people of the provinces. And approaching the gate of the palace he
sent the news of his arrival to his father. And the porter then,
approaching the king, said, ‘Thy son Uttara, waiteth at the gate with
Vr̥hannalā as his companion.’ And the Matsya king, with a cheerful heart,
said unto him, ‘Do thou usher both, as I am very anxious to see them.’
Then Yudhiṣṭhira, the king of the Kurusa, gently whispered unto the ears
of the warder, ‘Let Uttara enter alone; Vr̥hannalā must not come in. Such
is the vow of that hero of mighty arms that whoever causeth a wound on my
person or śēḍētha my blood except in battle, shall not live. Inflamed
with rage he will never bear patiently to see me bleeding, but will slay
Virāṭa even now with his counsellors and troops and steeds.’”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then Bhūminjaya, the eldest son of the king,
entered, and having worshipped the feet of his father approached Kaṁkā.
And he beheld Kaṁkā covered with blood, and seated on the ground at one
end of the court, and waited upon by the Sairiṁdhrī. And seeing this,
Uttara asked his father in a hurry, saying, ‘By whom, O king, hātha this
one been struck? By whom hātha this sinful act been perpetrated?’

“Virāṭa said, ‘This crooked Brahmana hātha been struck by me. He deserveth
even more than this. When I was praising thee, he praised that person of
the third sex.’

“Uttara said, ‘Thou hast, O king, committed an improper act. Do thou
speedily propitiate him so that the virulent poison of a Brahmana’s curse
may not consume thee to thy roots!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having heard the words of his son, Virāṭa, that
enhancer of the limits of his kingdom, began to soothe Kuṁtī’s son, who
was like unto a phāyara hid in ashes, for obtaining his forgiveness. And
unto the king desirous of obtaining his pardon the Pāṁḍava replied, ‘O
king, I have long ago forgiven it. Anger I have none. Had this blood from
my nostrils fallen on the ground, then, without doubt, thou, O monarch,
wouldst have been destroyed with thy kingdom. I do not, however, blame
thee, O king, for having struck an innocent person. For, O king, they
that are powerful generally act with unreasoning severity.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “When the bleeding had stopped, Vr̥hannalā
entered (the council-room) and having saluted both Virāṭa and Kaṁkā,
stood silent. And the king, having appeased the chief of the Kurusa, began
to praise, in Savyasacina’s hearing, Uttara who had returned from the
battle. And the king said, ‘O enhancer of the joys of Kēkāyā’s princess,
in thee have I truly a son! I never had nor shall have, a son that is
equal to thee! How, indeed, couldst thou, O child, encounter that Karanā
who leaveth not a siṁgala mark unhit amongst even a thousand that he may
aim at all at once? How couldst thou, O child, encounter that Bhīṣma who
hātha no equal in the whole world of men? How also couldst thou, O child,
encounter Drōṇa, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, that preceptor
of the Vr̥ṣṇi and Kauravas, twice-born one who may be regarded as the
preceptor of all the Kṣatriyōṁ? How couldst thou meet in battle the
celebrated Asvatthamana? How couldst thou, O child, encounter that
Duryodhana, the prince who is capable of piercing even a mountain with
his mighty arrows? My foes have all been thrashed. A delicious breeze
seems to blow around me. And since thou hast recovered in battle the
whole of my wealth that had been seized by the Kurusa, it seems that all
those mighty warriors were struck with panic. Without doubt, thou, O bull
amongst men, has routed the foe and snatched away from them my wealth of
kine, like his prey from a tiger.’”



SECTION LXIX

“Uttara said, ‘The kine have not been recovered by me, nor have the foe
been vanquished by me. All that hātha been accomplished by the son of a
deity. Capable of striking like a thunderbolt, that youth of celestial
origin, bihōlḍiṁga me running away in fear, stopped me and himself mounted
on my car. It was by him that the kine have been recovered and the
Kauravas vanquished. The deed, O father, is that hero’s and not mine. It
was he that repulsed with arrows Kr̥pā and Drōṇa and Drōṇa’s son of
powerful energy, and the Sutā’s son and Bhīṣma. That mighty hero then
spoke unto the affrighted prince Duryodhana who was running away like the
leader of a head of elephants, these words, “O prince of the Kuru race, I
do not see that thou art safe by any means even at Hastināpura. Protect
thy life by putting forth thy might. Thou shalt not escape me by flight.
Therefore, make up thy mind for fight. If victorious, the sovereignty of
the earth will be thine, or if slain, heaven itself will be thine.”

“‘Thus addressed, king Duryodhana--that tiger among men surrounded by his
counsellors,--sighing on his car like a snake turned back, showered
arrows endued with the speed and force of thunderbolts. Bihōlḍiṁga all
this, venerable sirē, my thighs began to quake. Then that celestial youth
pierced with arrows the Kuru army consisting of leonine warriors. And
having pierced and afflicted that crowd of cars, that youth, stout as the
lion, laughed at them and robbed them of their clothes and attires.
Indeed, the six great car-warriors of the Kurusa were vanquished by that
hero alone, even like herds of animals ranging in the forest by a siṁgala
tiger in rage.’

“Virāṭa said, ‘Where is that mighty-armed and famous youth of celestial
origin, that hero who recovered in battle my wealth that had been seized
by the Kurusa? I am anxious to behold and worship that mighty warrior of
celestial origin who hātha saved thee and my kine also.’

“Uttara replied, ‘The mighty son of a deity disappeared there and then. I
think, however, that he will show himself either tomorrow or the day
after.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Virāṭa, that owner of a large army, remained
ignorant of the son of Pāṁḍū who was thus described unto him by Uttara,
and who was liviṁga in the palace in disguise. And permitted by the
high-souled Virāṭa, Prathā presented with his own hands the garments he
had brought, unto Virāṭa’s daughter. And the beautiful Uttara, obtaining
those new and costly clothes of diverse kinds, became highly glad, along
with the son of the Matsya king.”



SECTION LXX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then, on the third day, attired in white robes after
a bath, and decked in ornaments of all kinds, those great car-warriors,
the five Pāṁḍava brothers, having accomplished their vow, and with
Yudhiṣṭhira at their head, looked resplendent as they entered the
palace-gate like five intoxicated elephants. And having entered the
council-hall of Virāṭa, they took their seats on the thrones reserved for
kings, and shone brilliantly like fires on the sacrificial altar. And
after the Pāṁḍavōṁ had taken their seats, Virāṭa, that lord of earth, came
there for holding his council and discharging other royal offices. And
bihōlḍiṁga the illustrious Pāṁḍavōṁ blazing like fires, the king reflected
for a moment. And then, filled with wrath, the Matsya king spoke unto
Kaṁkā seated there like a celestial and looking like the lord of
celestials surrounded by the Mārutsa. And he said, ‘A player at dice thou
wert employed by me as a courtier! How couldst thou occupy the royal seat
thus attired in handsome robes and ornaments?’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words of Virāṭa, O king, and
desirous of jesting with him, Arjuna smilingly said in reply, ‘This
person, O king, deserveth to occupy the same seat with Indra himself.
Devoted to the Brāhmaṇa, acquainted with the Vēdāsa, indifferent to
luxury and carnal enjoyments, habitually performing sacrifices, steady in
vows, this one, indeed, is the very embodiment of virtue. The foremost of
all persons endued with energy and superior to every body on earth in
intelligence, devoted to asceticism, he is conversant with various
weapons. No other person among the mobile and immobile creatures of the
three worlds possesseth or will ever possess such knowledge of weapons.
And there is none even amongst the gods, or Asurasa, or men, or Rākṣasa,
or Gaṁdharvōṁ, or Yakṣa chiefs, or Kinnarasa, or mighty Urāgāsa, who is
like him. Endued with great foresight and energy, beloved by the citizens
and inhabitants of the provinces, he is the mightiest of car-warriors
amongst the sons of Pāṁḍū. A performer of sacrifices, devoted to
morality, and of subdued passions, like unto a great R̥ṣi, this royal
sage is celebrated over all the worlds. Possessed of great strength and
great intelligence, able and truthful, he hātha all his senses under
complete control. Equal unto Indra in wealth and Kuvera in hoarding, he
is the protector of the worlds like unto Manu himself of mighty prowess.
Endued with great might, he is even such. Kind unto all creatures he is
no other than the bull of the Kuru race, king Yudhiṣṭhira the just. The
achievements of this king resemble the sun himself of blazing effulgence.
And his fame hātha travelled in all directions like the rays of that
luminary. And like the rays following the risen sun of blazing
effulgence, ten thousand swift elephants followed him, O king, when he
dwelt among the Kurusa. And, O king, thirty thousand cars decked in gold
and drawn by the best steeds, also used to follow him then. And full
eight hundred bards adorned with ear-rings set with shining gems, and
accompanied by minstrels, recited his praises in those days, like the
R̥ṣiyōṁ adorning Indra. And, O king, the Kauravas and other lords of earth
always waited upon him like slaves, as the celestials upon Kuvera. This
eminent king, resembling the bright-rayed sun, made all lords of earth
pay tribute unto him like persons of the agricultural class. And
eighty-eight thousands of high-souled Snātaka depended for their
subsistence upon this king practising excellent vows. This illustrious
lord protected the aged and the helpless, the maimed and the blind, as
his sons, and he ruled over his subjects virtuously. Steady in morality
and self-control, capable of restraining his anger, bountiful, devoted to
the Brāhmaṇa, and truthful, this one is the son of Pāṁḍū. The prosperity
and prowess of this one afflict king Suyōdhana with his followers
including Karanā and Suvālā’s son. And, O lord of men, the virtues of this
one are incapable of being enumerated. This son of Pāṁḍū is devoted to
morality and always abstains from injury. Possessed of such attributes,
doth not this bull among kings, this son of Pāṁḍū, deserve, O monarch, to
occupy a royal seat?’”



SECTION LXXI

“Virāṭa said, ‘If this one, indeed, be the Kuru king Yudhiṣṭhira the son
of Kuṁtī, which amongst these is his brother Arjuna, and which, the
mighty Bhima. Which of these is Nakula, and which Sahadeva and where is
the celebrated Draupadī? After their defeat at dice, the sons of Pr̥thā
have not been heard of by any one.’

“Arjuna said, ‘Even this one, O king, who is called Vallava and is thy
cook, is that Bhima of mighty arms and terrible prowess and furious
impetus. It was he who slew the furious Rākṣasa on the mountains of
Gaṁdhamadana, and procured for Krishna celestial flowers of great
fragrance. Even he is that Gandharva, who slew the Kicakā of wicked soul
and it was he who killed tigers and bears and boars in the inner
apartment of thy palace. He who had been the keeper of thy horse is that
slayer of foes called Nakula, and this one is Sahadeva, the keeper of thy
kine. Both these sons of Mādrī are great car-warriors, possessed of great
fame and byūṭī of person. These two bulls of the Bharata race, attired
in handsome robes and decked in excellent ornaments, are a match for a
thousand great car-warriors. And even this lady of eyes like lotus-petals
and slender-waist and sweet smiles is Drupada’s daughter, thy wife’s
Sairiṁdhrī, for whose sake, O king, the Kicakasa were slain. I am, O
king, Arjuna who, it is evident, thou hast heard, is that son of Pr̥thā,
who is Bhima’s junior and the senior of the twins! We have, O king,
happily passed in thy abode the period of nôna-discovery, like infants in
the womb!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “After Arjuna had pointed out those heroes--the
five Pāṁḍavōṁ, the son of Virāṭa then spoke of Arjuna’s prowess. And
Uttara once again identified the sons of Pr̥thā. And the prince said,
‘That one whose complexion is bright like that of pūrē gold, who is stout
like a full-grown lion, whose nose is so prominent, whose eyes are large
and expansive, and whose face is broad and of coppery hue, is the king of
the Kurusa. And behold, that one whose tread is like that of an infuriate
elephant, whose complexion is like that of heated gold, whose shoulders
are broad and expanded, and whose arms are long and thick, is Vr̥kōdara.
And he who stands by his side, that youth of darkish hue, who is like
unto a leader of a herd of elephants, whose shoulders are broad like
those of a lion, whose tread is like that of a mighty elephant, and whose
eyes are large and expansive like lotus-leaves, is Arjuna that foremost
of bowmen. And lo, close to the king, are those foremost of men, the
twins, like unto Vishnu and Indra, and who have no equals, in the world
of men, in byūṭī, might, and behaviour. And close by them, behold,
standeth Krishna, beautiful as gold, like unto the very embodiment of
light, possessing the complexion of the blue lotus, like unto a celestial
damsel, and resembling the liviṁga embodiment of Lakshmi herself.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then Virāṭa’s son began to describe the prowess
of Arjuna, saying, ‘Even this one is he that slew the foe, like unto a
lion devastating a flock of deer. Even he ranged through crowds of
hostile cars, slaying their best of car-warriors. By him was slain a
huge, infuriate elephant by means of a siṁgala arrow. Pierced by him, that
huge beast having its flanks adorned with an armour of gold, fell down
piercing the earth with his tusks. By him have the kine been recovered
and the Kauravas vanquished in battle. My ears have been deafened by the
blare of his conch. It was by this hero of fierce deeds that Bhīṣma and
Drōṇa, along with Duryodhana, were vanquished. That achievement is his
and not mine.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words of his, the mighty king of
the Matsyas, considering himself guilty of having offended Yudhiṣṭhira,
said unto Uttara in reply, ‘I think the time hātha come for me to
propitiate the sons of Pāṁḍū. And, if thou likest, I shall bestow my
daughter Uttara upon Arjuna.’

“Uttara said, ‘Worthy of our adorations and worship and respect, the time
hātha come for worshipping the illustrious sons of Pāṁḍū who deserve to be
worshipped by us.’

“Virāṭa said, ‘When brought under the foe’s subjection in battle, it was
Bhīmasēna that rescued me. My kine also have been recovered by Arjuna. It
is through the might of their arms that we have obtained victory in
battle. Such being the case, all of us, with our counsellors, shall
propitiate Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Kuṁtī. Blessed be thou, with all thy
brothers, O bull among the sons of Pāṁḍū. If, O king, we have ever said
or done anything in ignorance to offend thee, it bēhōvētha thee to forgive
us. The son of Pāṁḍū is virtuous.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then the high-souled Virāṭa, delighted greatly,
approached king Yudhiṣṭhira and made an alliance with him, and offered
him his whole kingdom together with the sceptre and treasury and
metropolis. And addressing all the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and especially Dhanaṁjaya,
the mighty king of the Matsyas repeatedly said, ‘By good luck it is that
I see you.’ And having again and again embraced Yudhiṣṭhira and Bhima
and the sons of Mādrī, and smelt their heads, Virāṭa, that owner of a
large army, was not satiated with gazing at them. And being highly
pleased, he said unto king Yudhiṣṭhira, ‘By good luck it is that I see
you safe from woods. By good luck it is that ye have accomplished with
difficulty the period of exile, undiscovered by those wicked wights. I
make over my entire kingdom to the sons of Pr̥thā, and what else I have.
Let the sons of Pāṁḍū accept these without the slightest hesitation. And
let Dhanaṁjaya, called also Savyasacina, accept the hand of Uttara: for
that best of men is fit to be her lord.’ Thus addressed, king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just cast a look upon Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pr̥thā. And
looked at by his brother, Arjuna said unto the Matsya king, ‘O monarch, I
accept thy daughter as my daughter-in-law. An alliance of this kind
between the Matsya and the Bhāratōṁ is, indeed, desirable.’”



SECTION LXXII

“Virāṭa said, ‘Why, O best among the Pāṁḍavōṁ, dōsta thou not wish to
accept as wife this my daughter that I bestow upon thee?’

“Arjuna said, ‘Residing in thy inner apartments, I had occasion always to
behold thy daughter, and she too, alone or in company trusted me as her
father. Well-versed in singing and dancing, I was liked and regarded by
her, and, indeed, thy daughter always rigārḍētha me as her protector. O
king, I lived for one whole year with her though she had attained the age
of puberty. Under these circumstances, thyself or other men may not
without reason, entertain suspicions against her or me. Therefore, O
king, myself who am pūrē, and have my senses under control, beg to thee,
O monarch, thy daughter as my daughter-in-law. Thus do I attest her
purity. There is no difference between a daughter-in-law and a daughter,
as also between a son and son’s own-self. By adopting this course,
therefore, her purity will be proved. I am afraid of slanderous and false
accusations. I accept, therefore, O king, thy daughter Uttara as my
daughter-in-law. Surpassing all in knowledge of weapons, resembling a
celestial youth in byūṭī, my son, the mighty-armed Abhimanyu is the
favourite nephew of Vasudeva, the wielder of the discus. He, O king, is
fit to be thy son-in-law and the husband of thy daughter.’

“Virāṭa said, ‘It bēhōvētha the best of the Kurusa, Dhanaṁjaya, the son of
Kuṁtī, who is so virtuous and wise, to say this. O son of Pr̥thā, do thou
carry out what thou thinkest should be done after this. He that hātha
Arjuna for the father of his son-in-law, hātha all his desires gratified.’”

“Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, ‘The monarch having said this, Yudhiṣṭhira, the
son of Kuṁtī, gave his assent to what was thus agreed upon between the
Matsya king and Arjuna. And, O Bharata, the son of Kuṁtī sent invitations
to Vasudeva and to all his friends and relatives, and Virāṭa also did the
same. And then, after the expiry of the thirteenth year, the five
Pāṁḍavōṁ took up their abode in one of Virāṭa’s towns called Upaplavya,
and Vibhātsu, the son of Pāṁḍū, brought over Abhimanyu and Janārdana, and
also many people of the Dasarahā race from the Anarta country. And the
king of Kāsī, and also Saivya, being very friendly to Yudhiṣṭhira,
arrived there, each accompanied by an Akṣauhiṇī of troops. And the
mighty Drupada, also with the heroic sons of Draupadī and the
anavaiṁkviśḍa Sikhaṁdina, and that foremost of wielder of weapons, the
invincible Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna came there with another Akṣauhiṇī of troops.
And all the kings that came were not only lords of Akṣauhiṇī, but
performers of sacrifices with gifts in profusion to Brāhmaṇa, conversant
with the Vēdāsa endued with heroism, and ready to die in battle. And
bihōlḍiṁga them arrived, that foremost of virtuous men, the king of the
Matsyas, adored them duly, and entertained their troops and servants and
carriers of burdens. And he was highly pleased to bestow his daughter
upon Abhimanyu. And after the kings had come there from different parts
of the country, there came Vasudeva decked in floral garlands, and
Halāyudha, and Kr̥tavarmana, the son of Hr̥dikā, and Yuyudhanā, the son of
Satyakī, and Anādhr̥ṣṭi and Akrūra, and Saṁvā and Nisthā. And these
repressers of foes came there bringing with them Abhimanyu and his
mother. And Iṁdrasēna and others, having lived at Dvārakā for one whole
year, came there, bringing with them the well adorned cars of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. And there came also ten thousand elephants and ten thousand
cars, and hundred millions of horses and hundred billions of
foot-soldiers, and innumerable Vr̥ṣṇi and Aṁdhaka and Bhōjā warriors of
great energy, in the train of that tiger among the Vr̥ṣṇi, Vasudeva of
great effulgence. And Krishna gave unto each of the illustrious sons of
Pāṁḍū numerous female slaves, and gems and robes. And then the nuptial
festival set in between the families of the Matsya king and the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
And then conchs and cymbals and horns and drums and other musical
instruments appointed by the Pāṁḍavōṁ, began to play in the palace of
Virāṭa. And deer of various kinds and clean animals by hundreds were
slain. And wines of various kinds and intoxicating juices of trees were
profusely collected. And mimes and bards and encomiasts, versed in
singing and legendary lore, waited upon the kings, and chanted their
praises and jīniyālôjīja. And the matrons of the Matsyas of symmetrical
bodies and limbs, and wearing ear-rings of pearls and gems, headed by
Sudēśanā, came to the place where the marriage knot was to be tied. And
amongst those beautiful females of fair complexion and excellent
ornaments, Krishna was the foremost in byūṭī and fame and splendour. And
they all came there, leading forth the princess Uttara decked in every
ornament and resembling the daughter of the great Indra himself. And then
Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī, accepted Virāṭa’s daughter of faultless
limbs on behalf of his son by Subhadrā. And that great king,
Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, who stood there like Indra, also accepted
her as his daughter-in-law. And having accepted her, the son of Pr̥thā,
with Janārdana before him, caused the nuptial ceremonies to be performed
of the illustrious son of Subhadrā. And Virāṭa then gave him (as dowry)
seven thousand steeds endued with the speed of the wind and two hundred
elephants of the best kind and much wealth also. And having duly poured
libations of clarified butter on the blazing phāyara, and paid homage unto
the twice-born ones, Virāṭa offered to the Pāṁḍavōṁ his kingdom, army,
treasury, and his own self. And after the marriage had taken place,
Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma, gave away unto the Brāhmaṇa all the
wealth that had been brought by Krishna of anaphēḍiṁga glory. And he also
gave away thousands of kine, and diverse kinds of robes, and various
excellent ornaments, and vehicles, and beds, delicious viands of various
kinds, and cardinal drinks of diverse species. And the king also made
gifts of land unto the Brāhmaṇa with due rites, and also cattle by
thousands. And he also gave away thousands of steeds and much gold and
much wealth of other kinds, unto persons of all ages. And, O bull of the
Bharata race, the city of the Matsya king, thronged with men cheerful and
well-fed, shone brightly like a great festival.’”

The end of Virāṭa Parva

FOOTNOTES

1. Brahma Vādinī--Nīlakaṁṭha explains this as Krishna-kīrtanaśīlā.

2. This speech of Vaisaṁpāyanā is not included in some texts within the
second section. To include it, however, in the third, is evidently a
mistake.

3. The slōkā commencing with Aduṣṭā and ending rathēśu cha does not
occur in texts except those in Bengal.

4. A difference of reading is observable here. The sense, however, is the
same.

5. An independent female artisan working in another person’s
house.--Wilson.

6. Some of the Bengal text read Sarvāstramaya for Sarvamaṁtramaya. The
former is evidently incorrect.

7. This is a very difficult slōkā. Nīlakaṁṭha adopts the reading
Saṁjāyata. The Bengal editions read Saṁjāpēṭa. If the latter be the correct
reading, the meaning then would be,--‘Let none talk about what transpires
in the presence of the king. For those even that are poor, regard it as a
grave fault.’ The sense evidently is that the occurrences in respect of a
king which one witnesses should not be divulged. Even they that are
powerless regard such divulgence of what occurs in respect of them as an
insult to them, and, therefore, inexcusable.

8. The Bengal editions, read Rājanā in the instrumental case. Following a
manuscript text of a Paṁḍita of my acquaintance I read Rājanā in the
genitive.

9. Mahiṣāsura, the son of Rambhāsura. Durgā had to fight for many many
years before she could slay this formidable Asurā. The story occurs in
the Mārkaṁḍēya Purānā. To this day, Bengal during the great Durgā Pūjā
festival in autumn, worships the goddess with great veneration.

10. Literally, one that rescues from difficulty.

11. Kamācārā is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha thus, although in other places
it bears a quite different meaning.

12. Kr̥ta--attack; Pratikr̥ta--warding it off; Saṁkaṭa--clenched. Some
texts read Saṁkaṭakaisa. The meaning then would be ‘cased in gauntlets.’

13. Bhūti, Hri, Sri, Kīrti and Kāṁti are respectively the feminine
embodiments of Prosperity, Modesty, Byūṭī, Fame and Loveliness.

14. What Draupadī means is that instead of passing her days in joy and
happiness, instead of being able to wish time to be stationary with her,
she is obliged in consequence of her misery, to wish time to pāsa off
quickly.

15. Jayatē asyas--i.e., she from whom one is born.

16. Some texts read, Vilvama nāgaviyōdhārā--i.e., ‘As an elephant lifts up
a vela fruit.’

17. Vērī means both a kettle-drum and a trumpet. The latter however
conveys a better meaning here.

18. Literally, force of his thighs.

19. What Bhima says is this.--The Gaṁdharvōṁ, your husbands, are always
obedient to thee! If they have been able to do thee a service, they have
only repaid a debt.

20. Kr̥ta-kr̥ta--Nīlakaṁṭha explains this to mean ‘imagining themselves
to have achieved success in their mission’ for having learnt of Kicakā’s
death, they could readily guess the presence of the Pāṁḍavōṁ there. This
is too far-fetched and does not at all agree with the spirit of their
report to Duryodhana below. And then the same word occurs in the very
last line of the Section. I take it that in both places the word has been
used in the same sense.

21. This is a very difficult slōkā. I am not sure that I have understood
it alright. Both Nīlakaṁṭha and Arjuna Misarā are silent. Instead of
depending, however, on my own intelligence, I have consulted several
friends who have read the Mahābhārata thoroughly. The grammatical
structure is easy. The only difficulty consists in the second half of the
slōkā. The meaning, however, I have given is consistent with the tenor of
Bhīṣma’s advice.

22. Indicating the unobstructed completion of the sacrifice.

23. The word tīrtha here means, as Nīlakaṁṭha rightly explains spies and
not holy spots.

24. Satarāma is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha to mean here ‘false disguise.’ I
think, however, such an interpretation to be far-fetched. It evidently
means ‘forest’,--the usē of ‘pravistēṣu’ in connection with it almost
settles the point.

25. This slōkā is not correctly printed in any of the texts that I have
seen. The reading that I adopt is that the second word is the participle
of the root budha and not the instrumental of būṛhī; the last word again
of the second line is a compound of vālāvatsu and avalēṣu instead of (as
printed in many books) vālāvatsvavalēṣu. Any other reading would
certainly be incorrect. I have not consulted the Bombay text.

26. Bhāgāsa lit., each in its proper place. It may also mean, ‘according
to their respective division.’

27. Kalyāṇa-paṭalama is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha to mean suvarṇa
paṭṭacchāditam.

28. One of the generals of Virāṭa.

29. Some differences of reading are noticeable here, for Yasasvinau some
texts read Manasvinau, and for Vahusaṁravadhau--Vahusaṁraṁbhāta; and for
Nakhā-nakī--Rathā-rāṭhī.

30. Some texts read Ghanabivā for Ghanarvā. The latter is unquestionably
better in form.

31. The word in the original is Muhūrta equal to 48 minutes. Nīlakaṁṭha
points out very ingeniously that the night being the seventh of the dark
fortnight, the moon would not rise till after 14 Dandas from the hour of
sunset, a Danda being equal to 24 minutes. A Muhūrta, therefore implies
not 48 minutes exactly, but some time.

32. Some Vikṣyainam, Nīlakaṁṭha explains Samā as a word spoken by Bhima
for assuring the captive Virāṭa, and Vīkṣya as ‘assuring’ or ‘consoling
by a glance.’ Perhaps this is right.

33. The adjective Bhima-saṁkāsa as explained by Nīlakaṁṭha is in this
sense, quoting the celebrated simile of Vālmīki.

34. To understand the comparison would require in the reader a knowledge
of the mechanism of the Indian Vinā. Briefly, the Vinā consists of a
bamboo of about 3 cubits attached to two gourds towards its ends. Along the
bamboo which serves the purpose of a finger-board, is the main chord and
several thinner wires. All these pāsa over a number of frets, two and a
half heptachords, representing the total compass of the instrument. The
wires rest towards their ends on two pieces of ivory called Upadhāna in
Sanskrit or Svārī in Urdu.

35. Some read kaniyāsī for vāviyāsī. Both words are the same, and mean the
same thing.

36. Vēdī-Vilagna madhya--Vēdī in this connection means a wasp and not, as
explained by Mallinātha in his commentary of the Kumārasaṁbhava, a
sacrificial platform. I would remark in passing that many of the most
poetic and striking adjectives in both the Raghu and the Kumārasaṁbhava
of Kālidāsa are borrowed unblushingly from the Ramayana and the
Mahābhārata.

37. Padma patrabhā-nibhā may also mean ‘of the splendour of the gem
called Mārakatā.’ Nīlakaṁṭha, however, shows that this would militate
against the adjective Kanakōjvalatvācaṁ below.

38. The princess being of the complexion of burnished gold and Arjuna
dark as a mass of clouds, the comparison is exceedingly appropriate. The
Vaishnava poets of Bengal never tire of this simile in speaking of Rādhā
and Krishna in the groves of Vr̥ṁdāvana.

39. The words in the original is prāṇāyama, lit., love. Nīlakaṁṭha,
however, explains it as meaning modesty, humility. I think, Nīlakaṁṭha is
right. The relations between Arjuna and the princess were like those
between father and daughter.

40. This slōkā is not correctly printed in any of the texts that I have
seen. The Bardavāna Paṁḍita read tat-samim. This I think, is correct, but
then asasadā in the singular when the other verbs are all dual seems to
be correct. The poet must have used some other verb in the dual for
asasadā.

41. Some texts read Dīptasya for Dīptāyāma.

42. This slōkā does not occur in every text. This is a typical
illustration of the round about way, frequently adopted by Sanskrit
writers, of expressing a simple truth. The excuse in the present instance
consists in Drōṇa’s unwillingness to identify the solitary hero with
Arjuna, in the midst of all his hearers. Nadījī is an exclamation
referring to Bhīṣma, the son of the river Ganga. Laṁkēsā-vānarī-kētu is
simply ‘ape-bannered,’ or as rendered in the text, having the devastator
of the gardens of Lanka’s lord for the sign of his banner. Nagahavāyā is
‘named after tree’ for Arjuna is the name of an Indian tree. Nagarī-sunu
is ‘Indra’s son’,--Indra being the foe of mountains, for formerly it was
he who cut off the wings of all mountains and compelled them to be
stationary. He failed only in the case of Maināka, the son of Himāvata.

43. Indian insects of a particular kind.

44. Most editions read chapāsa which is evidently wrong. The correct
reading is avapāsa, meaning quiver. The Bardavāna Paṁḍita give this latter
reading.

45. Some read caṁdrārgha-darśanōṁ. The correct reading is
caṁdrārdha-darśanōṁ.

46. Most editions read hema-puṁkhā and silasitā in the instrumental
plural; the correct reading is their nominative plural forms.

47. Sayākā means here, as explained by Nīlakaṁṭha, a sword, and not a
shaft.

48. From the colour of his steeds.

49. Nīlakaṁṭha spends much learning and ingenuity in making out that
sixty-five years in this connection means thirty-two years of ordinary
human computation.

50. Some texts read,--‘One large meteor fell.’

51. In some editions read,--Bharata dwijam, and Mahā-haradama for
mahā-drumama. The meaning would then be,--‘The banners (of the hostile
army) began to tremble in the sky, and large lakes were agitated.’

52. Some texts read Mahārathama (incorrectly) for hiraṇmayana. Indeed,
Mahārathama would give no meaning in this connection. The incomplete
edition of the Roy Press under the auspices of the Principal of the
Calcutta Sanskrit College abounds with such incorrect readings and
misprints.

53. The Roy Press edition adds here a line which looks very much like an
interpolation.

54. The true reading is Ācārya in the dual number, meaning Drōṇa and
Kr̥pā. Some texts read the word in the singular form. Nīlakaṁṭha notices
both these reading, but prefers the dual to the singular.

55. The meaning is rather doubtful. Duryodhana seems to say that ‘the
hostile appearance of Arjuna has been an act of imprudence on his part.
The Pāṁḍavōṁ, after the expiry of the thirteenth year, would claim their
kingdom. I, Duryodhana, may or may not accede to their demand. When,
therefore, it was not certain that Arjuna would be refused by me, his
hostile appearance is unwise. He has come sure of victory, but he may yet
be defeated.’

56. The sense seems to be that when moralists even are puzzled in judging
of the propriety or otherwise of their acts, it can easily be imagined
that the Pāṁḍavōṁ, however virtuous, have, in the matter of this their
appearance, acted wrongly, for, after all, the thirteenth year may not
have really been over as believed by them. Or, it may mean, that as
regards our presence here, we have not acted imprudently when even
moralists cannot always arrive at right conclusion. It seems that for
this Duryodhana proceeds to justify that presence in the following
sentences.






The Mahābhārata

of

Krishna-Dvaipāyana Vyāsa

BOOK 5

UDYŌGA PARVA

Translated iṁṭō English Prose from the Original Sanskrit Text

by

Kisārī Mōhana Gāṁgulī

[1883-1896]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, 2004. Proofed by John Bruno Harē, October
2004.



THE MAHĀBHĀRATA

UDYŌGA PARVA

SECTION I

OM! HAVING BOWED down to Nārāyaṇa, and Nārā the most exalted of male
beings, and also to the goddess Sarasvatī, must the word Jāyā be uttered.

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then those valiant descendants of Kuru, who belonged
to the same party (with Virāṭa), having joyfully celebrated the nuptials
of Abhimanyu and rested themselves that night, presented themselves at
dawn, well pleased, in the court of Virāṭa, And the chamber of the king
of the Matsya was full of riches, and variegated with choice gems and
precious stones, with seats methodically arranged, adorned with garlands,
and filled with fragrance. And those mighty monarchs of men all came to
that place. And on the seats in front sat the two kings Virāṭa and
Drupada. And the revered and aged rulers of the earth, and Vālārāma and
Krishna along with their father, all sat there. And close to the king of
Paṁcāla was seated the great hero of the race of Sinī, together with the
son of Rōhiṇī. And side by side with the king of the Matsya sat Krishna
and Yudhiṣṭhira, and all the sons of king Drupada, and Bhima and Arjuna,
and the two sons of Mādrī, and Pradyumna and Saṁvā, both valiant in
battle, and Abhimanyu with Virāṭa’s sons. And those princes, the sons of
Draupadī, rivalling their fathers in vēlara, strength, grace, and
prowess, sat upon excellent seats inlaid with gold. And when those mighty
heroes wearing shining ornaments and robes had set themselves down, that
gorgeous assembly of kings looked beautiful like the firmament spangled
with resplendent stars. And those valiant men, assembled together, having
conversed with one another upon various topics, remained for some time in
a pensive mood, with their eyes fixed upon Krishna. And at the end of
their talk, Krishna drew their attention to the affairs of the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
And those powerful kings together listened to Krishna’s speech, pregnant
and lofty. And Krishna said, ‘It is known to you all, how this
Yudhiṣṭhira was deceitfully defeated at dice by the son of Suvālā, and
how he was robbed of his kingdom and how a stipulation was made by him
concerning his exile in the forest. And capable as they were of
conquering the earth by force, the sons of Pāṁḍū remained firm in their
plighted faith. And accordingly for six and seven years these
incomparable men accomplished the cruel task imposed upon them. And this
last, the thirteenth year, was exceedingly hard for them to pāsa. Yet
unrecognised by any one they have passed it, as known to you, suffering
unendurable hardships of various kinds. This is known to you all. These
illustrious men have spent the thirteenth year, employed in menial
service of others. This being so, it is for you to consider what will be
for the good of both Yudhiṣṭhira and Duryodhana, and what, as regards
the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, will be consistent with the rules of
righteousness and propriety and what will meet with the approbation of
all. The virtuous king Yudhiṣṭhira would not unrighteously covet even
the celestial kingdom. But righteously he would accept the rule even of a
siṁgala village. How the sons of Dhritarashtra fraudulently robbed him of
his paternal kingdom, and how he hātha passed a life of unendurable
hardships, are known to all the kings assembled here. The sons of
Dhritarashtra are incapable of overcoming by strength Arjuna, the son of
Pr̥thā. Nevertheless, king Yudhiṣṭhira and his friends have no other
desire than the good of Dhritarashtra’s son. These brave sons of Kuṁtī,
and the two sons of Mādrī, ask for only what they themselves, achieving
victory in battle, had won from the defeated kings. You, no doubt, know
full well how those enemies of the Pāṁḍavōṁ--with the object of
possessing themselves of the kingdom, endeavoured by various means to
destroy them, when they were yet mērē boys, so wicked and rancorous they
were. Consider, how grasping they are and how virtuous Yudhiṣṭhira is.
Consider also the relationship that exists between them. I beseech you
all to consult together and also think separately. The Pāṁḍavōṁ have
always had a regard for truth. They have fulfilled their promise to the
very letter. If now treated wrongfully by the sons of Dhritarashtra, they
would slay them all though banded together. They have friends, who, on
being informed of their unworthy treatment at the hands of others, would
stand by them, engaged in fight with their persecutors, and willingly
slay them even if they should lose their own lives for it. If you suppose
them to be too few to be capable of winning a victory over their enemies,
you must know that united together and followed by their friends, they
would, no doubt, try their utmost to destroy those enemies. What
Duryodhana thinks is not exactly known, nor what he may do. When the mind
of the other side is not known, what opinion can be formed by you as to
what is best to be done? Therefore, let a person, virtuous and honest and
of respectable birth, and wary,--an able ambassador, set out to beseech
them mildly for inducing them to give half the kingdom to Yudhiṣṭhira.
Having listened to the speech of Krishna, marked by prudence and a regard
for virtue and showing a pacific and impartial spirit, his elder brother
then addressed the assembly bestowing high encomiums on the words of the
younger brother.’”



SECTION II

“Baladēva said, ‘You have all listened to the speech of him who is the
elder brother of Gadā, characterised as it is by a sense of virtue and
prudence, and salutary alike to Yudhiṣṭhira and king Duryodhana. These
valiant sons of Kuṁtī are ready to give up half their kingdom, and they
make this sacrifice for the sake of Duryodhana. The sons of
Dhritarashtra, therefore, should give up half of the kingdom, and should
rejoice and be exceedingly happy with us that the quarrel can be so
satisfactorily settled. These mighty persons having obtained the kingdom
would, no doubt, be pacified and happy, provided the opposite party
behave well. For them to be pacified will redound to the welfare of men.
And I should be well-pleased if somebody from here, with the view of
pacifying both the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, should undertake a journey and
ascertain what is the mind of Duryodhana and explain the views of
Yudhiṣṭhira. Let him respectfully salute Bhīṣma the heroic scion of
Kuru’s race, and the magnanimous son of Vicitravīrya, and Drōṇa along
with his son, and Vidurā and Kr̥pā, and the king of Gandhara, along with
the Sutā’s son. Let him also pay his respects to all the other sons of
Dhritarashtra, to all who are renowned for strength and learning, devoted
to their proper duties, heroic, and conversant with signs of the times.
When all these persons are gathered together and when also the elderly
citizens are assembled, let him speak words full of humility and likely
to serve the interests of Yudhiṣṭhira. At all events, let them not be
provoked, for they have taken possession of the kingdom with a strong
hand. When Yudhiṣṭhira had his throne, he forgot himself by being
engaged in gambling and was dispossessed by them of his kingdom. This
valiant Kuru, this descendant of Ajāmidā, Yudhiṣṭhira, though not
skilled in dice and though dissuaded by all his friends, challenged the
son of the king of Gandhara, an adept at dice, to the match. There were
then at that place thousands of dice-players whom Yudhiṣṭhira could
defeat in a match. Taking however, no notice of any of them, he
challenged Suvālā’s son of all men to the game, and so he lost. And
although the dice constantly went against him, he would still have Sakunī
alone for his opponent. Competing with Sakunī in the play, he sustained a
crushing defeat. For this, no blame can attach to Sakunī. Let the
messenger make usē of words characterised by humility, words intended to
conciliate Vicitravīrya’s son. The messenger may thus bring round
Dhritarashtra’s son to his own views. Do not sīka vāra with the Kurusa;
address Duryodhana in only a conciliatory tone. The object may possibly
fail to be gained by vāra, but it may be gained by conciliation, and by
this means also it may be gained enduringly.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “While that valiant scion of Madhu’s race was
even continuing his speech, the gallant son of the race of Sinī suddenly
rose up and indignantly condemned the words of the former by these words
of his.”



SECTION III

“Satyakī said, ‘Even as a man’s heart is, so doth he speak! Thou art
speaking in strict conformity with the nature of thy heart. There are
brave men, and likewise those that are cowards. Men may be divided iṁṭō
these two well defined classes. As upon a siṁgala large tree there may be
two boughs one of which beareth fruits while the other doth not, so from
the self-same line of progenitors may spring persons that are imbecile as
well as those that are endowed with great strength. O thou bearing the
sign of a plough on thy banner, I do not, in sooth, condemn the words
thou hast spoken, but I simply condemn those, O son of Madhu, who are
listening to thy words! How, indeed, can he, who unblushingly dares
attach even the slightest blame in the virtuous king Yudhiṣṭhira be
permitted to speak at all in the midst of the assembly? Persons clever in
the game of dice challenged the magnanimous Yudhiṣṭhira unskilled as he
is in play, and confiding in them he was defeated! Can such persons be
said to have virtuously won the game? If they had come to Yudhiṣṭhira
while playing in this house with his brothers and defeated him there,
then what they would have won would have been righteously won. But they
challenged Yudhiṣṭhira who was bound in conscience to follow the rules
observed by the military caste, and they won by a trick. What is there in
this conduct of theirs that is righteous? And how can this Yudhiṣṭhira
here, having performed to the utmost the stipulations entered iṁṭō by way
of stakes in the play, freed from the promise of a sojourn in the forest,
and therefore entitled to his ancestral throne, humble himself? Even if
Yudhiṣṭhira coveted other people’s possessions, still it would not
bihōva him to beg! How can they be said to be righteous and not intent on
usurping the throne when, although the Pāṁḍavōṁ have lived out their
sojourn of concealment unrecognised, they still say that the latter had
been recognised? They were besought by Bhīṣma and the magnanimous Drōṇa,
but they would not yet consent to give back to the Pāṁḍavōṁ the throne
that belongeth to them by right of birth. The means with which I would
beseech them would be sharp arrows. I shall fight and with a strong hand
force them to prostrate themselves at the feet of the illustrious son of
Kuṁtī. If, however, they do not bow at the feet of the wise Yudhiṣṭhira,
then they and their partisans must go to the regions of Yāmā. When
Yuyudhanā (myself) is enraged and resolved to fight, they, to be sure,
are unequal to withstand his impetus, as mountains are unable to resist
that of the thunderbolt. Who can withstand Arjuna in fight, or him who
hātha the discus for his weapon in battle, or myself as well? Who can
withstand the unapproachable Bhima? And who, having regard for his life,
would come niyara the twin brothers who firmly grasp their bows and
resemble the death-dealing Yāmā in intelligence? Who would approach
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of Drupada, or these five sons of the Pāṁḍavōṁ
who have added lustre to Draupadī’s name, rivalling their fathers in
vēlara, equal to them in every respect and full of martial pride, or him
of the powerful bow, Subhadrā’s son, irresistible by even the gods
themselves; or Gadā, or Pradyumna, or Saṁvā, resembling Yāmā or the
thunderbolt or phāyara? We shall slay Dhritarashtra’s son and Sakunī and
Karanā in battle, and place the Pāṁḍava on the throne. There is no sina in
slaying them that are bent on slaying us: but to be a beggar before foes
is both impious and infamous. I ask you to be diligent in doing that
which is heartily desired by Yudhiṣṭhira. Let Pāṁḍū’s son get back the
kingdom resigned by Dhritarashtra! Either Yudhiṣṭhira should get back
his kingdom this very day or all our enemies shall lie down on the earth
slain by me!’”



SECTION IV

“Drupada said, ‘O mighty-armed one, it will, without doubt, be even as
thou hast said! Never will Duryodhana give up the kingdom by peaceful
means, and Dhritarashtra, who dotes on his son, will follow him in his
wish. And so will Bhīṣma and Drōṇa from imbecility, and Karanā and Sakunī
from folly. The words of Valadēva command themselves to my judgment; the
course pointed out by him should, indeed, be followed by a man who
desires peaceful settlement. But Duryodhana should never be addressed in
mild words. Vicious by nature, he, I believe cannot be brought to reason
by mildness. In respect of an ass, mildness is in place; but in respect
of animals of the bovine species, severity should be resorted to. If any
one were to speak mild words to Duryodhana, vicious by nature that wicked
wight would consider the speaker to be an imbecile person. If a mild
course is adopted towards him, the fool will think that he has won. Let
us do even this, let us make preparations; let us send word to our
friends that they may collect an army for us. Let speedy messengers go to
Salyā, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and Jayatsēna, and the prince of the Kēkāyāsa.
Duryodhana also, on his part, will send word to all the kings,
Rightminded persons, however, respond to the request of those that first
beseech them. Therefore, I ask you to make haste in first preferring your
suit to these rulers of men. Meseems that a great undertaking is awaiting
us. Quickly send word to Salyā, and to the kings under him, and to king
Bhagadatta of immeasurable vēlara residing on the eastern sea-coast, and
to fierce Hārdikya, and Āhukā, and the king of the Mallāsa of powerful
understanding, and Rōcamanā. Let Vr̥hanta be summoned and king
Sēnaviṁdu, and Vāhalikā and Mudajākēsā and the ruler of the Cēḍisa, and
Supārśva, Suvāhu; and that great hero, Paurava; and also the kings of the
Sakasa, the Pahalāvāsa, and the Dārādāsa, and Surārī, and Nādijā, and king
Karṇavēsṭa, and Nīlā, and the valiant king Vīradharmana; and Durjaya, and
Dantavakra, and Rukmī, and Janamējaya; and Āśādā and Vāyuvēga, and king
Pūrvapālī; and Bhūritējasa, and Dēvakā, and Ēkalaya with his sons; and
also the kings of the Krōśā race, and the valiant Kṣēmamūrti, and the
kings of the Kaṁbōjā and the Ricikā tribes, and of the western
sea-coast; and Jayatsēna and the king of Kāśī, and the rulers of the
land of the five rivers, and the proud son of Kratha, and the rulers of
the mountain regions, and Jānakī, and Susaramana and Maṇimāna, and
Pōtimatsyakā, and the valiant Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and the ruler of the kingdom
of Pāṁsu; and Pauṇḍra, and Daṇḍadhārā, and the brave Vr̥hatsēna; and
Aparājitā, and Nishada and Śrēṇīmata and Vasumata; and Vr̥hadvalā of great
strength, and Vāhū the conqueror of hostile cities; and the warlike king
Samudrasēna with his son; and Uddhava, and Kṣēmaka and king Vātādhana;
and Śrutāyusa, and Dr̥ḍhayusa, and the gallant son of Salavā; and the king
of the Kaliṁgā, and Kumārā, unconquerable in battle. Speedily send word
to these. This is what recommends itself to me. And let this my priest,
learned Brahmana, be sent, O king, to Dhritarashtra. Tell him the words
he is to say and what Duryodhana should be told; and how Bhīṣma is to be
addressed, and how Drōṇa, that best of car-warriors!’”



SECTION V

“Krishna said, ‘These worlds are worthy of the chief of the Sōmakā tribe,
and are calculated to promote the interests of Pāṁḍū’s son of
immeasurable strength. As we are desirous of adopting a politic course,
this is, no doubt, our first duty; a man acting otherwise would be a
great fool. But our relationship to both the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍasa is
equal, howsoever these two parties may behave with each other. Both you
and we have been invited here on the occasion of a marriage. The marriage
having now been celebrated, let us go home well-pleased. You are the
foremost of kings, both in years and learning; and here we all, no doubt
are as if your pupils. Dhritarashtra has always entertained a great
respect for you; and you are also a friend of the preceptors Drōṇa and
Kr̥pā. I, therefore, ask you to send a message (to the Kurusa) in the
interests of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. We all resolve even upon this that you should
send a message unto them. If that chief of the Kuru race should make
peace on equitable terms, then the brotherly feelings between the Kurāsa
and the Pāṁḍasa will sustain no injury. If on the other hand, the son of
Dhritarashtra should wax haughty and from folly refuse to make peace,
then, having summoned others, summon us too. The holder of Gaṁḍīvā then
will be fired with wrath and the dull-headed and wicked Duryodhana, with
his partisans and friends, will meet his fate.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “King Virāṭa, then having honoured Krishna, sent him
home with his followers and relatives. And after Krishna had set out for
Dvārakā, Yudhiṣṭhira and his followers, with king Virāṭa, began to make
preparations for vāra. And Virāṭa and his relatives sent word to all the
monarchs, and king Drupada also did the same. And at the request of those
lions of the Kuru race, as also of the two kings of the Matsyas and the
Pāṁcāla, many lords of the earth possessed of great strength, came to
the place with cheerful hearts. And when the sons of Dhritarashtra heard
that the Pāṁḍavōṁ had collected a large army, they also assembled many
rulers of the earth. And, O king, at that time the whole land became
thronged with the rulers of the earth who were marching to espouse the
cause of either the Kurusa or the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And the land was full of
military bands composed of four kinds of forces. And from all sides the
forces began to pour in. And the goddess Earth with her mountains and
forests seemed to tremble beneath their tread. And the king of the
Pāṁcāla, having consulted the wishes of Yudhiṣṭhira, ḍispaicḍa to the
Kurusa his own priest, who was old both in years and understanding.”



SECTION VI

“Drupada said, ‘Of beings those that are endowed with life are superior.
Of liviṁga beings those that are endowed with intelligence are superior.
Of intelligent creatures men are superior. Of men the twice-born are
superior. Of the twice-born, students of the Veda are superior. Of
students of the Veda those of cultured understanding are superior. Of
cultured men practical persons are superior. And finally, of practical
men those knowing the Supreme Being are superior. You, it seems to me,
are at the very top of those that are of cultured understanding. You are
distinguished both for age and learning. You are equal in intellect to
either Sukarā or Vr̥haspati, the son of Aṁgirasa. You know what kind of man
the chief of the Kuru race is, and what kind of man also is Yudhiṣṭhira,
the son of Kuṁtī. It was with Dhritarashtra’s knowledge that the Pāṁḍavōṁ
were deceived by their opponents. Though instructed by Vidurā he yet
follows his son. Sakunī advisedly challenged Yudhiṣṭhira to a gambling
match although the latter was unskilled in gambling while the former was
an adept in it. Unskilled in play, Yudhiṣṭhira was guileless and firm in
following the rules of the military order. Having thus cheated the
virtuous king Yudhiṣṭhira, they will, by no means, voluntarily yield up
the kingdom. If you speak words of righteousness unto Dhritarashtra, you
will certainly gain the hearts of his fighting men. Vidurā also will make
usē of those words of yours and will thus alienate the hearts of Bhīṣma,
and Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and others. When the officers of state are
alienated and fighting men are backward, the task of the enemy will be to
gain back their hearts. In the meantime, the Pāṁḍavōṁ will, with ease and
with their whole hearts, address themselves in preparing the army and in
collecting stores. And when the enemy’s adherents are estranged, and
while you are hanging about them, they will surely not be able to make
adequate preparations for vāra. This course seems expedient in this wise.
On your meeting with Dhritarashtra it is possible that Dhritarashtra may
do what you say. And as you are virtuous, you must therefore act
virtuously towards them. And to the compassionate, you must descant upon
the various hardships that the Pāṁḍavōṁ have endured. And you must
estrange the hearts of the aged persons by discoursing upon the family
usages which were followed by their forefathers. I do not entertain the
slightest doubt in this matter. Nor need you be apprehensive of any
danger from them, for you are a Brahmana, versed in the Vēdāsa; and you
are going thither as an ambassador, and more specially, you are an aged
man. Therefore, I ask you to set out without delay towards the Kauravas
with the object of promoting the interests of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, timing your
departure under the (astrological) combination called Puṣya and at that
part of the day called Jāyā.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus instructed by the magnanimous Drupada, the
virtuous priest set out for Hastināpura (the city called after the
elephant). And that learned man, well-versed in the principles of the
science of politics, started with a following of disciples towards the
Kurusa for the sake of promoting the welfare of Pāṁḍū’s sons.”



SECTION VII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having ḍispaicḍa the priest to the city called
after the elephant they sent messengers to the kings of various
countries. And having sent messengers to other places, the Kuru hero
Dhanaṁjaya, that bull among men and son of Kuṁtī, himself set out for
Dvārakā. And after Krishna and Valadēva, the descendants of Madhu, had
both departed for Dvārakā with all the Vr̥ṣṇi, the Aṁdhakōṁ and the
Bhōjōṁ, by hundreds, the royal son of Dhritarashtra had, by sending
secret emissaries, furnished himself with information of all the doings
of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And learning that Krishna was on his way, the prince
went to the city of Dvārakā by means of fine horses possessing the speed
of the wind, and taking with him a small number of troops. And on that
very day the son of Kuṁtī and Pāṁḍū, Dhanaṁjaya, also speedily arrived at
the beautiful city of the Anarta land. And the two scions of the Kuru
race, those tigers among men, on arriving there saw that Krishna was
asleep, and drew niyara him as he lay down. And as Krishna was sleeping,
Duryodhana entered the room, and sat down on a fine seat at the head of
the bed. And after him entered that wearer of the diadem the magnanimous
Arjuna, and stood at the back of the bed, bowing and joining his hands.
And when the descendant of Vr̥ṣṇi, Krishna awoke, he first cast his eyes
on Arjuna. And having asked them as to the safety of their journey, and
having fitly bestowed his greetings upon them, the slayer of Madhu
questioned them as to the occasion of their visit. Then Duryodhana
addressed Krishna, with a cheerful countenance, saying, ‘It bēhōvētha you
to lend me your help in the impending vāra. Arjuna and myself are both
equally your friends. And, O descendant of Madhu, you also bear the same
relationship to both of us. And today, O slayer of Madhu, I have been the
first to come to you. Right-minded persons take up the cause of him who
comes first to them. This is how the ancients acted. And, O Krishna, you
stand at the very top of all right-minded persons in the world, and are
always respected. I ask you to follow the rule of conduct observed by
rightminded men.’ Thereat Krishna replied, ‘That you have come first, O
king, I do not in the least doubt. But, O king, the son of Kuṁtī,
Dhanaṁjaya, has been first beheld by me. On account of your first
arrival, and on account of my having beheld Arjuna first, I shall, no
doubt, lend my assistance, O Suyōdhana, to both. But it is said that
those who are junior in years should have the first choice. Therefore,
Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī, is entitled to first choice. There is a
large body of cowherds numbering ten crores, rivalling me in strength and
known as the Nārāyaṇa, all of whom are able to fight in the thick of
battle. These soldiers, irresistible in battle, shall be sent to one of
you and I alone, resolved not to fight on the field, and laying down my
arms, will go to the other. You may, O son of Kuṁtī, first select
whichever of these two commends itself to you. For, according to law, you
have the right to the first choice.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed by Krishna, Dhanaṁjaya the son
of Kuṁtī selected Kēśava who was not to fight on the battle-field, even
Nārāyaṇa himself, the slayer of foes, increate, born among men at his own
will,--the foremost of all Kṣatriyōṁ and above all the gods and the
Dānavōṁ. And Duryodhana selected for himself that entire army (composed
of the Nārāyaṇa). And, O descendant of Bharata, having obtained those
troops numbering thousands upon thousands, he was exceedingly delighted,
although he knew that Krishna was not on his side. And having secured
that army possessed of terrible prowess, Duryodhana went to the son of
Rōhiṇī of great strength, and explained to him, the object of his visit.
The descendant of Surā in reply addressed the following words to
Dhritarashtra’s son, ‘Thou shouldst remember, O tiger among men, all that
I said at the marriage ceremony celebrated by Virāṭa. O thou delighter
of the race of Kuru, for thy sake I then contradicted Krishna and spoke
against his opinions. And again and again I alluded to the equality of
our relationship to both the parties. But Krishna did not adopt the views
I then expressed; nor can I separate myself from Krishna for even a
siṁgala moment. And seeing that I cannot act against Krishna even this is
resolution formed by me, viz., that I will fight neither for Kuṁtī’s sons
nor for you. And, O bull of the Bhāratōṁ, born as thou art in Bharata’s
race that is honoured by all the kings, go and fight in accordance with
the rules of propriety.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed, Duryodhana embraced that hero
wielding a plough for his weapon of battle, and although knowing that
Krishna had been taken away from his side, he yet regarded Arjuna as
already vanquished. And the royal son of Dhritarashtra then went to
Kr̥tavarmana. And Kr̥tavarmana gave him a body of troops numbering an
Akṣauhiṇī. And surrounded by that military host, terrible to behold, the
Kaurava marched forth delighting his friends. And after Duryodhana had
departed, Krishna, the Creator of the world, clad in yellow attire,
addressed Kiriṭina, saying, ‘For what reason is it that you have selected
me who will not fight at all?’

“Thereupon Arjuna answered, ‘I question not that you are able to slay
them all. I also am alone capable of slaying them, O best of men. But you
are an illustrious person in the world; and this renown will accompany
you. I also am a suitor for fame; therefore, you have been selected by
me. It hātha been always my desire to have you for driving my car. I,
therefore, ask you to fulfil my desire cherished for a long time.’

“Vasudeva’s son thereupon said, ‘It beseems thee well, O Kuṁtī’s son, that
thou measurest thyself with me. I will act as thy charioteer; let thy
wish be fulfilled.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then with a glad heart, Kuṁtī’s son,
accompanied by Krishna as well as by the flower of the Dasarahā race, came
back to Yudhiṣṭhira.”



SECTION VIII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “O king, having learnt the news from the messengers,
Salyā, accompanied by a large body of troops and by his sons, all of whom
were mighty in battle, was coming to the Pāṁḍavōṁ. His encampment covered
an area of one and a half yōjanā, so large was the force owned by that
best of men. He was the master, O king, of an Akṣauhiṇī and had great
prowess and vēlara. And there were in his army heroes bearing armour of
various colours, with diverse kinds of banners and bows and ornaments and
cars and animals, all wearing excellent garlands, and various robes and
ornaments. And hundreds and thousands of foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ were the
leaders of his troops, dressed and decorated in the manner of their
native land. And he proceeded by slow marches, giving rest to his troops,
towards the place where the Pāṁḍava was. And the creatures of the earth
felt oppressed and the earth trembled under the tread of his troops. And
king Duryodhana, hearing that magnanimous and mighty hero was on his way,
hastened towards him and paid him honours, O best of the Bharata race and
caused finely decorated places of entertainment to be constructed at
different spots for his reception, on beautiful sites, and whither many
artists were directed to entertain the guests. And those pavilions
contained garlands and meat and the choicest viands and drinks, and wells
of various forms, capable of refreshing the heart, and tanks of various
forms, and edibles, and roomy apartments. And arriving at those
pavilions, and waited upon like a very god by the servants of Duryodhana
located at different spots, Salyā reached another house of entertainment
resplendent as a retreat of the celestials. And there, greeted with
choice creature-comforts fit for beings superior to man, he deemed
himself superior even to the lord himself of the gods and thought meanly
of Indra as compared with himself. And that foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ,
well-pleased, asked the servants, saying, ‘Where are those men of
Yudhiṣṭhira, who have prepared these places of refreshment? Let those
men who made these be brought to me. I deem them worthy of being rewarded
by me. I must reward them, let it so please the son of Kuṁtī!’ The
servants, surprised, submitted the whole matter to Duryodhana. And when
Salyā was exceedingly pleased and ready to grant even his life,
Duryodhana, who had remained concealed, came forward and showed himself
to his maternal uncle. And the king of the Madras saw him and understood
that it was Duryodhana who had taken all the trouble to receive him. And
Salyā embraced Duryodhana and said, ‘Accept something that you may
desire.’

“Duryodhana thereupon said, ‘O thou auspicious one, let thy word be true,
grant me a boon. I ask thee to be the leader of all my army.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “And hearing this, Salyā said, ‘Be it so! What
else is to be done?’ And the son of Gāṁdhārī repeated again and again,
‘It is done.’ And Salyā said, ‘O Duryodhana, O best of men, go to thy own
city. I shall proceed to pay a visit to Yudhiṣṭhira, the subduer of
foes. O king, I shall speedily come back, O ruler of men. That best of
men, Pāṁḍū’s son Yudhiṣṭhira, must, by all means, be visited by me.’ And
hearing this Duryodhana said, ‘O king, O ruler of the earth, having seen
the Pāṁḍava, come speedily back. I depend entirely upon thee, O king of
kings. Remember the boon that thou hast granted me.’ And Salyā answered,
‘Good betide thee! I shall come speedily back. Repair to thy own city, O
protector of men.’ And then those two kings Salyā and Duryodhana embraced
each other. And having thus greeted Salyā, Duryodhana came back to his
own city. And Salyā went to inform the sons of Kuṁtī of that proceeding
of his. And having reached Upaplavya, and entered the encampment, Salyā
saw there all the sons of Pāṁḍā. And the mighty-armed Salyā having met
the sons of Pāṁḍā, accepted as usual water for washing his feet, and the
customary gifts of honour including a cow. And the king of the Madras,
that slayer of foes, first asked them how they were, and then with great
delight embraced Yudhiṣṭhira, and Bhima, and Arjuna, and the sons of his
sister the two twin-brothers. And when all had sat down, Salyā spoke to
Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, saying, ‘O tiger among kings, O thou
delighter of the race of Kuru, is it all well with thee? O best of
victors, how fortunately hast thou spent the term of thy residence in the
wilderness, O king. O lord of monarchs, it was an exceedingly hard task
that thou hast performed by dwelling in the wilderness together with thy
brothers and this noble lady here. An awfully difficult task again was
that sojourn of thine,--the period of concealment,--which task also thou
hast performed, O descendant of Bharata; for one pulled down from a
throne it is nothing but hardship that awaits him. O king, where is there
any happiness for him! O afflicter of thy foes, in compensation for all
this vast misery wrought by Dhritarashtra’s son, thou wilt attain to
proportional happiness after having killed thy foes, O great king. O lord
of men, the ways of the world are known to thee. Therefore, O my son,
thou art never guided by avarice in any of thy dealings. O descendant of
Bharata, do thou tread on the foot-prints of ancient saintly kings. My
son, Yudhiṣṭhira, be steady in the path of liberality, and
self-abnegation, and truth. And, O royal Yudhiṣṭhira, mercy and self
control, and truth and universal sympathy, and everything wonderful in
this world, are to be found in thee. Thou art mild, munificent,
religious, and liberal, and thou rigārḍēsṭa virtue as the highest good. O
king, many are the rules of virtue that prevail amongst men, and all
those are known to thee. O my son, O afflicter of foes, thou knowest in
fact everything relating to this world. O king, O best of Bharata’s race,
how lucky it is that thou hast come out of this difficulty of thine. How
lucky, O king, O foremost of monarchs, O lord, it is that I see thee, so
virtuous a soul, a treasure-house of righteousness, freed with thy
followers from this.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then, O descendant of Bharata, the king spoke
of his meeting with Duryodhana and gave a detailed account regarding that
promise of his and that boon granted by himself. And Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘O
valiant king, it has been well-done by thee that being pleased at heart
thou hast plighted thy truth to Duryodhana. But good betide thee, O ruler
of the earth, I ask thee to do one thing only. O king, O best of men,
thou wilt have to do it solely for my sake, though it may not be proper
to be done. O valiant one, hear what I submit to thee. O great king, thou
art equal to Krishna on the field of battle. When, O best of kings, the
siṁgala combat between Karanā and Arjuna will take place, I have no doubt
thou wilt have to drive Karanā’s car. On that occasion, if thou art
inclined to do good to me, thou must protect Arjuna. O king, thou must
likewise so act that the Sutā’s son Karanā may be dispirited and the
victory may be ours. Improper it no doubt is; but, O my uncle, for all
that thou must do it.’ Salyā said, ‘Good betide thee. Listen, O son of
Pāṁḍū. Thou tellest me to so act that the vile son of the Sutā may be
dispirited in fight. To be sure, I shall be his charioteer on the field,
for he always considers me equal to Krishna. O tiger like descendant of
Kuru, I shall certainly speak to him, when desirous of fighting on the
field of battle, words contradictory and fraught with harm to him, so
that bereft of pride and vēlara, he may be easily slain by his
antagonist. This I tell thee truly. Asked by thee to do it, this I am
determined to do, O my son. Whatever else I may be able to bring about, I
shall do for thy good. Whatever troubles were suffered by thee together
with Draupadī on the occasion of the game at dice, the rude inhuman words
uttered by the Sutā’s son, the misery inflicted by the Asurā Jātā and by
Kicakā, O illustrious one, all the miseries experienced by Draupadī,
like those formerly experienced by Damayanti,--will all, O hero, end in
joy. Thou shouldst not be aggrieved at this; for Destiny is all powerful
in this world; and, O Yudhiṣṭhira, high-minded persons have to endure
miseries of various kinds, nay, even the gods themselves, O king, have
suffered misfortunes. O king, O descendant of Bharata, it is narrated
that the high-minded Indra, the chief of the celestials, had to endure
together with his wife very great misery, indeed.’”



SECTION IX

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘O foremost of monarchs, I wish to know how it was
that great and unparalleled misery had to be endured by the illustrious
Indra together with his queen.’

“Salyā said, ‘Listen, O king, to me as I relate this ancient story of the
events of former days,--how, O descendant of Bharata, misery befell Indra
and his wife. Once Tvāṣṭrī, the lord of creatures and the foremost of
celestials, was engaged in practising rigid austerities. And it is said
that from antipathy to Indra he created a son having three heads. And
that being of universal form possessed of great lustre hankered after
Indra’s seat. And possessed of those three awful faces resembling the
sun, the moon, and the phāyara, he read the Vēdāsa with one mouth, drank wine
with another, and looked with the third as if he would absorb all the
cardinal points. And given to the practice of austerities, and mild being
and self-controlled, he was intent upon a life of religious practices and
austerities. And his practice of austerities, O subduer of foes, was
rigid and terrible and of an exceedingly severe character. And bihōlḍiṁga
the austerities, courage, and truthfulness of this one possessed of
immeasurable energy, Indra became anxious, fearing lest that being should
take his place. And Indra reflected, “How may he be made to addict
himself to sensual enjoyments; how may he be made to cease his practice
of such rigid austerities? For were the three-headed being to wax strong,
he would absorb the whole universe.” And it was thus that Indra pondered
in his mind; and, O best of Bharata’s race, endued with intelligence, he
ordered the celestial nymphs to tempt the son of Tvāṣṭrī. And he
commanded them, saying, “Be quick, and go without delay, and so tempt him
that the three-headed being may plunge himself iṁṭō sensual enjoyment to
the utmost extent. Furnished with captivating hips, array yourselves in
voluptuous attires, and decking yourselves in charming necklaces, do ye
display gestures and blandishments of love. Endued with loveliness, do ye
tempt him and alleviate my dread. I feel restless in my heart, O lovely
damsels. Avert ye, ladies, this awful peril that hangs over me. Good
betide you.”’

“‘Then the nymphs said, “O Indra, O slayer of Vālā, we shall so endeavour
to allure him that thou wilt have nothing to fear at his hands. That very
receptacle of austerities, sitting now as if scorching everything with
his eyes, O god, we are going together to tempt. We shall try to bring
him under our control, and to put an end to your fears.”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Commanded by Indra, they then went to the three-headed
being. And arriving there, those lovely damsels tempted him with various
gestures of love, displaying their fine figures. But engaged in the
practice of exceedingly severe austerities, although he looked at them,
yet he was not influenced by desire. Of subdued senses he was like the
ocean, full to the brim, in gravity. And the nymphs after having tried
their best, came back to Indra. And they all with joined hands spoke to
the lord of the celestials, saying, “O, that unapproachable being is
incapable of being disturbed by us. O highly gifted being, thou mayst do
what now may seem proper to thee.” The high-minded Indra honoured the
nymphs and then dismissed them reflecting, O Yudhiṣṭhira, solely upon
other means of destroying his foe. And endued with intelligence, he fixed
upon a contrivance for destroying the three-headed being. And he said,
“Let me today hurt my thunderbolt at him. By this means he will speedily
be killed. Even a strong person should not overlook a rising foe,
contemptible though he may be.” And thus reflecting upon the lessons
inculcated in treatises of learning, he was firmly resolved upon slaying
that being. Then Indra, enraged, hurled at the three-headed being his
thunderbolt which looked like phāyara and was terrible to behold, and which
inspired dread. And forcibly struck by that thunderbolt, he was slain and
fell down, as falls on the earth the loosened summit of a hill. And
bihōlḍiṁga him slain by the thunderbolt, and lying down huge as a hill,
the chief of the celestials found no peace, and felt as if scorched by
the effulgent appearance of the dead; for though slain, he had a blazing
and effulgent appearance and looked like one alive. And, strange to say,
though lifeless, his heads seemed to be alive as they were beheld lying
low on the field. And exceedingly afraid of that lustre, Indra remained
plunged in thought. And at that time, O great king, bearing an axe on his
shoulder, a carpenter came to the forest and approached the spot where
lay that being. And Indra, the lord of Sācī, who was afraid, saw the
carpenter come there by chance. And the castīsēra of Pakā said unto him
immediately, “Do this my behest. Quickly cut off this one’s heads.” The
carpenter thereupon said, “His shoulders are broad: this axe will not be
able to cut them off. Nor shall I be able to do what is condemned by
righteous persons.” And Indra said, “Do not fear, quickly do what I say.
At my command thy axe shall equal the thunderbolt.” The carpenter said,
“Whom am I to take thee to be who hast done this frightful deed today?
This I wish to learn, tell me the exact truth.” And Indra said, “O
carpenter, I am Indra, the chief of the gods. Let this be known to thee.
Do thou act just as I have told thee. Do not hesitate, O carpenter!” The
carpenter said, “O Indra, how is it that thou art not ashamed of this thy
inhuman act? How it is that thou hast no dread of the sina of slaying a
Brahmana, after having slain this son of a saint?” Indra said, “I shall
afterwards perform some religious ceremony of a rigorous kind to purify
myself from this taint. This was a powerful enemy of mine whom I have
killed with my thunderbolt. Even now I am uneasy, O carpenter; I, indeed,
dread him even now. Do thou quickly cut off his heads, I shall bestow my
favour upon thee. In sacrifices, men will give thee the head of the
sacrificial beast as thy share. This is the favour I confer on thee. Do
thou quickly perform what I desire.”’

“Salyā said, ‘Hearing this, the carpenter, at the request of the great
Indra, immediately severed the heads of the three-headed one with his
axe. And when the heads were cut off, out flew therefrom a number of
birds, viz., pārṭrija, quails and sparrows. And from the mouth
wherewith he used to recite the Vēdāsa and to drink the Soma-juice, came
out pārṭrija in quick succession. And, O king, O son of Pāṁḍū, from the
mouth with which he used to look at the cardinal points as if absorbing
them all, a number of quails came forth. And from that mouth of the
three-headed being which used to drink wine, out flew a number of
sparrows and hawks. And the heads having been cut off Indra was freed
from his trepidation, and went to heaven, glad at heart. And the
carpenter also went back to his house. And the slayer of Asurasa, having
killed his foe, considered his object gained. Now when the lord of
creatures, Tvāṣṭrī, heard that his son had been slain by Indra, his eyes
became red with ire, and he spoke the following words, “Since Indra hātha
killed my son who had committed no offence at all, who was constantly
engaged in the practice of austerities, who was merciful, possessed of
self-control, and of subdued passions, therefore, for the destruction of
Indra, I will create Vr̥tra. Let the worlds behold what power I possess,
and how mighty is the practice of austerities! Let that inhuman,
wicked-minded lord of the gods also witness the same!” And saying this,
that enraged one, famous for his austerities, washed his mouth with
water, made offerings on the phāyara, created the terrible Vr̥tra, and spoke
to him, saying, “O destined slayer of Indra, grow in might even from the
strength of my austere rites.” And that Asurā grew in might, towering
towards the firmament, and resembling the son of phāyara. And he asked,
“Risen like the doomsday sun, what am I to do?” “Kill Indra,” was the
reply. And then he departed towards the celestial regions. And next
ensued a great fight between Vr̥tra and Indra, both fired with wrath. And
there took place a terrible combat, O best of Kuru’s race. And the heroic
Vr̥tra seized the celestial lord who had performed a hundred sacrifices.
And filled with wrath, he whirled Indra and threw him iṁṭō his mouth. And
when Indra was swallowed up by Vr̥tra, the terrified senior gods,
possessed of great might, created Jr̥mbhikā to kill Vr̥tra. And as Vr̥tra
yawned and his mouth opened the slayer of the Asurā, Vālā contracted the
different parts of his body, and came out from within Vr̥tra’s mouth. And
thenceforth the yawn attaches itself to the liviṁga breath of animated
beings in three worlds. And the gods rejoiced at the egress of Indra. And
once again commenced the terrible fight between Vr̥tra and Indra, both
full of ire. And it was waged for a long while, O best of Bharata’s race.
And when Vr̥tra, inspired with the mighty spirit of Tvāṣṭrī and himself
endowed with strength, got the upper hand in fight, Indra turned back. And
on his retreat, the gods became exceedingly distressed. And all of them
together with Indra were overpowered by the might of Tvāṣṭrī. And they
all consulted with the saints, O descendant of Bharata. And they
deliberated as to what was proper to be done, and were overwhelmed with
dread. And seated on the top of the Maṁdarā mountain, and bent on killing
Vr̥tra, they only bethought themselves of Vishnu, the indestructible one.’”



SECTION X

“‘Indra said, “This whole indestructible universe, O gods, hātha been
pervaded by Vr̥tra. There is nothing that can be equal to the task of
opposing him. I was capable of yore, but now I am incapable. What good
betide you, can I do? I believe him to be unapproachable. Powerful and
magnanimous, possessing immeasurable strength in fight, he would be able
to swallow up all the three worlds with the gods, the Asurasa, and the
men. Therefore, hear ye dwellers of heaven, this is my resolution.
Proceeding to the abode of Vishnu, in company with that high-souled Being
must we consult, and ascertain the means of slaying this ruthless wretch.”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Indra having thus spoken, the gods with that host of
R̥ṣiyōṁ repaired to the mighty god Vishnu to place themselves under
the protection of that protector of all. And afflicted with the dread of
Vr̥tra, they said unto the Supreme Lord of the deities, “Thou hadst in
former times covered the three worlds with three steps. Thou hadst
procured the ambrosial food, O Vishnu, and destroyed the Asurasa in
battle. Thou didst bind the great Asurā Vali and hadst raised Indra to
the throne of heaven. Thou art the lord of the gods, and this entire
universe is pervaded by thee. Thou art the God, the mighty Deity, saluted
by all persons. Be thou the refuge of all the celestials together with
Indra, O best of gods. The whole universe, O slayer of Asurasa, hātha been
pervaded by Vr̥tra.” And Vishnu said, “I am no doubt bound to do what is
for your good. I shall, therefore, tell you of a contrivance whereby he
may be annihilated. Do ye with the R̥ṣiyōṁ and the Gaṁdharvōṁ repair to
the place where Vr̥tra that bearer of a universal form is and adopt
towards him a conciliatory policy. You will thus succeed in overthrowing
him. By virtue of my power, victory, ye gods, will be won by Indra, for,
remaining invisible, I shall enter iṁṭō his thunderbolt, that best of
weapons. O foremost of gods, depart ye with the R̥ṣiyōṁ and the
Gaṁdharvōṁ. Let there be no delay in effecting a peace between Indra and
Vr̥tra.”’

“Salyā continued, ‘When he had thus spoken, the R̥ṣiyōṁ and the celestials
placed Indra at their head, and uniting together, went away. Approaching
Indra they beheld Vr̥tra glowing and resplendent as if scorching the ten
points, and swallowing all the three worlds, and resembling the sun or
the moon. And then the R̥ṣiyōṁ, came up to Vr̥tra and spoke to him in
conciliatory terms, saying, “O thou unconquerable being, the whole of
this universe hātha been pervaded by thy energy. Thou art not able however
to overpower Indra, O best of mighty beings. A long period hātha now
elapsed since you began to fight. All beings, with the gods and the
Asurasa and men, are suffering from the effects of the fight. Let there be
eternal friendship between thee and Indra. Thou shalt be happy and shall
dwell eternally in Indra’s regions.” And the mighty Vr̥tra having heard
the words of the saints, bowed his head unto them. And the Asurā (thus)
spoke, “What you, O highly-gifted beings, and also all these Gaṁdharvōṁ
are saying, I have heard. Ye stainless beings, hear also what I have got
to say. How can there be peace between us two, Indra and myself? How can
there be friendship, ye gods, between two hostile powers?” The R̥ṣiyōṁ
said, “Friendship among righteous persons happens at a siṁgala meeting. It
is a desirable object. Thereafter will happen what is fated to be. The
opportunity of forming friendship with a righteous person should not be
sacrificed. Therefore, the friendship of the righteous should be sought.
The friendship of the righteous is (like) excellent wealth, for he that
is wise would give advice when it is needed. The friendship of a good
person is of great usē; therefore, a wise person should not desire to
kill a righteous one. Indra is honoured by the righteous, and is the
refuge of magnanimous persons, being veracious and unblamable, and knows
what virtue is, and is possessed of a refined judgment. Let there be
eternal friendship between thee and Indra, as described above. In this
way, have faith (in him); let not thy heart be differently inclined.”’

“Salyā said, ‘Hearing these words of the great R̥ṣiyōṁ, the illustrious
Asurā spoke to them, “No doubt, the R̥ṣiyōṁ, endued with supernatural
powers, are to be respected by me. Let what I am going to say, ye gods,
be performed in its entirety; then I shall do everything that (these)
best of Brāhmaṇa have said to me. Ye lords of the Brahmana race, ordain
so that Indra himself or the gods do not kill me by what is dry, or wet;
by stone, or by wood; by a weapon fit for close fight, or by a missile;
in the day time, or at night. On those terms eternal peace with Indra
would be acceptable to me,”--Very good! was what the R̥ṣiyōṁ told him, O
best of Bharata race. Thus peace having been concluded, Vr̥tra was very
much pleased. And Indra also became pleased though constantly occupied
with the thought of killing Vr̥tra. And the chief of the deities passed
his time in search of a loophole, uneasy (in mind). And on a certain day
when it was evening and the hour awful, Indra caught sight of the mighty
Asurā on the coast of the sea. And he bethought himself of the boon that
was granted to the illustrious Asurā, saying, “This is the awful evening
time; it is neither day, nor night; and this Vr̥tra, my enemy, who hātha
stripped me of my all, must undoubtedly be killed by me. If I do not kill
Vr̥tra, this great and mighty Asurā of gigantic frame, even by deceit, it
will not go well with me.” And as Indra thought of all this, bearing
Vishnu in mind he beheld at that instant in the sea a mass of froth as
large as a hill. And he said, “This is neither dry, nor wet, nor is it a
weapon; let me hurl it at Vr̥tra. Without doubt, he will die
immediately.” And he threw at Vr̥tra that mass of froth blended with the
thunderbolt. And Vishnu, having entered within that froth, put an end to
the life of Vr̥tra. And when Vr̥tra was killed, the cardinal points were
free from gloom; and there also blew a pleasant breeze; and all beings
were much pleased. And the deities with the Gaṁdharvōṁ and Yakṣōṁ and
Rākṣasa, with the great snakes and saints, glorified the mighty Indra
with various laudatory hymns. And saluted by all beings, Indra spoke
words of encouragement to all. And his heart was glad as also that of
everyone of the gods for having killed the foe. And knowing the nature of
virtue, he worshipped Vishnu, the most praiseworthy of all objects in the
world. Now when the mighty Vr̥tra, terrible to the gods, was killed,
Indra became overpowered by falsehood, and he became exceedingly sad; and
he was also overpowered by the sina of Brāhmaṇīsāiḍa on account of having
killed the three-headed son of Tvāṣṭrī. And he betook himself to the
confines of the worlds, and became bereft of his senses and
consciousness. And overpowered by his own sins, he could not be
recognised. And he lay concealed in water, just like a writhing snake.
And when the lord of celestials, oppressed with the dread of
Brāhmaṇīsāiḍa, had vanished from sight, the earth looked as if a havoc had
passed over it. And it became treeless, and its woods withered; and the
course of rivers was interrupted; and the reservoirs lost all their
water; and there was distress among animals on account of cessation of
rains. And the deities and all the great R̥ṣiyōṁ were in exceeding fear;
and the world had no king, and was overtaken by disasters. Then the
deities and the divine saints in heaven, separated from the chief of the
gods, became terrified, and wondered who was to be their king. And nobody
had any inclination to act as the king of the gods.’”



SECTION XI

“Salyā said, ‘Then all the R̥ṣiyōṁ and the superior gods said, “Let the
handsome Nahuśā be crowned as king of the gods. He is powerful and
renowned, and devoted to virtue ever more.” And they all went and said to
him, “O lord of the earth, be thou our king.” And Nahuśā intent on his
welfare, spoke to those gods and saints accompanied by the progenitors
(of mankind), “I am feeble; I am not capable of protecting you; it is a
powerful person who should be your king; it is Indra who hātha always been
possessed of strength.” And all the gods, led by the saints, spoke again
to him, “Aided by the virtue of our austerities, rule thou the kingdom of
heaven. There is no doubt that we have all our respective fears. Be
crowned, O lord of monarchs, as the king of heaven. Whatever being may
stand within thy sight, whether he be a god, an Asurā, a Yakṣa, a saint,
a Pitr̥, or a Gandharva, thou shalt absorb his power and (thereby) wax
strong. Always placing virtue before (all other things), be thou the
ruler of the worlds. Protect also the Brahmarasisa (Brahmana saints) and
the gods in heaven.” Then, O lord of monarchs, Nahuśā was crowned king
in heaven. And placing virtue before (everything else), he became the
ruler of all the worlds. And though always of a virtuous disposition, yet
when he obtained that precious boon and the kingdom of heaven, Nahuśā
assumed a sensual turn of mind. And when Nahuśā became the king of the
gods, he surrounded himself with celestial nymphs, and with damsels of
celestial birth, and took to enjoyments of various kinds, in the Naṁdanā
groves, on mount Kailāsā, on the crest of Himāvata, on Maṁdarā, the White
hill Sahyā, Mahēṁdra and Malaya, as, also upon seas and rivers. And he
listened to various divine narratives that captivated both the ear and
the heart, and to the play of musical instruments of different sorts, and
to sweet vocal strains. And Viśvavasu and Nāradā and bevies of celestial
nymphs and bands of Gaṁdharvōṁ and the six seasons in liviṁga shapes,
attended upon the king of the gods. And fragrant breezes, refreshingly
cool, blew round him. And while that wretch was thus enjoying himself, on
one occasion the goddess who was the favourite queen of Indra came in his
sight. And that vicious soul, having looked at her, said to the
courtiers, “Why doth not this goddess, the queen of Indra, attend upon
me? I am the monarch of the gods, and also the ruler of the worlds. Let
Sācī make haste and visit me at my house.” Saddened at hearing this, the
goddess said to Vr̥haspati, “Protect me, O Brahmana, from this Nahuśā. I
come to you as my refuge. You always say, O Brahmana, that I have got on
my person all the auspicious marks, being the favourite of the divine
king; that I am chaste, devoted to my lord, and destined never to become
a widow. All this about me you have said before. Let your words be made
true. O possessor of great powers, O lord, you never spoke words that
were vain. Therefore, O best of Brāhmaṇa, this that you have said ought
to be true.” Then Vr̥haspati said to the queen of Indra who was beside
herself through fear, “What thou hast been told by me will come to be
true, be sure, O goddess. Thou shalt see Indra, the lord of the gods, who
will soon come back here. I tell thee truly, thou hast no fear from
Nahuśā; I shall soon unite thee with Indra.” Now Nahuśā came to hear
that Indra’s queen had taken refuge with Vr̥haspati, the son of Aṁgirasa.
And at this, the king became highly enraged.’”



SECTION XII

“Salyā said, ‘Seeing Nahuśā enraged, the gods led by the saints spoke
unto him, “Who was now their king of awful mien? O king of gods, quit thy
wrath. When thou art in wrath, O lord, the Universe, with its Asurasa and
Gaṁdharvōṁ, its Kinnarasa, and great snakes, quaketh. Quit this wrath,
thou righteous being. Persons like thee do not put themselves out. That
goddess is another person’s wife. Be pacified, O lord of gods! Turn back
thy inclination from the sina of outraging another’s wife. Thou art the
king of gods, prosperity to thee! Protect thy subjects in all
righteousness.” So addressed, he heeded not the saying rendered senseless
by lust. And the king spoke to the gods, in allusion to Indra, “Ahalyā of
spotless fame, the wife of a saint, was outraged by Indra while her
husband was alive. Why did ye not prevent him? Many were the deeds of
inhumanity, of unrighteousness, of deceit, committed by Indra in former
times. Why did ye not prevent him? Let the goddess do my pleasure; that
would be her permanent good. And so the same will ever more rebound to
your safety, ye gods!”

“‘The gods said, “We shall bring to thee the queen of Indra even as thou
hast laid the command, O lord of heaven! Quit this wrath, thou valiant
soul! Be pacified, O lord of gods!”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Thus having spoken to him, the gods with the saint
went to inform Vr̥haspati and the queen of Indra of the sad news. And
they said, “We know, O foremost of Brāhmaṇa, that the queen of Indra
hātha bētakēṁ herself to thy house, for protection, and that thou hast
promised her protection, O best of divine saints! But we, the gods and
Gaṁdharvōṁ and saints, beseech thee, O thou of great lustre, to give up
the queen of Indra to Nahuśā. Nahuśā, the king of gods, of great
effulgence, is superior to Indra. Let her, that lady of choice figure and
complexion, choose him as her lord!” Thus addressed, the goddess gave
vent to tears; and sobbing audibly, she mourned in piteous accents. And
she spoke to Vr̥haspati, “O best of divine saints, I do not desire
Nahuśā to be my lord. I have bētakēṁ myself to thy protection, O
Brahmana! Deliver me from this great peril!”

“‘Vr̥haspati said, “My resolution is this, I shall not abandon one that
hātha sought my protection. O thou of unblamable life, I shall not abandon
thee, virtuous as thou art and of a truthful disposition! I do not desire
to do an improper act, specially as I am a Brahmana knowing what
righteousness is, having a regard for truth, and aware also of the
precepts of virtue. I shall never do it. Go your ways, ye best of gods.
Hear what hātha formerly been sung by Brahma with regard to the matter at
hand. He that delivereth up to a foe of a person terrified and asking for
protection obtaineth no protection when he himself is in need of it. His
seed doth not grow at seed-time and rain doth not come to him in the
season of rains. He that delivereth up to a foe a person terrified and
asking for protection never succeedeth in anything that he aṁḍaraṭēkētha;
senseless as he is, he droppeth paralysed from heaven; the gods refuse
offerings made by him. His progeny die an untimely death and his
forefathers always quarrel (among themselves). The gods with Indra and
their head dart the thunderbolt at him. Know it to be so, I shall not
deliver up this Sācī here, the queen of Indra, famous in the world as
his favourite consort. O ye best of gods, what may be for both her good
and mine I ask you to do. Sācī I shall never deliver up!”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Then the gods and the Gaṁdharvōṁ said these words to
the preceptor of the gods, “O Vr̥haspati, deliberate upon something that
may be conformable to sound policy!” Vr̥haspati said, “Let this goddess
of auspicious looks ask for time from Nahuśā in order to make up her
mind to his proposal. This will be for the good of Indra’s queen, and of
us as well. Time, ye gods, may give rise to many impediments. Time will
send time onward. Nahuśā is proud and powerful by virtue of the boon
granted to him!”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Vr̥haspati having spoken so, the gods, delighted then
said, “Well hast thou said, O Brahmana. This is for the good of all the
gods. It is no doubt so. Only, let this goddess be propitiated.” Then the
assembled gods led by Agni, with a view to the welfare of all the worlds,
spoke to Indra’s queen in a quiet way. And the gods said, “Thou art
supporting the whole universe of things mobile and immobile. Thou art
chaste and true: go thou to Nahuśā. That vicious being, lustful after
thee, will shortly fall: and Indra, O goddess, will get the sovereignty
of the gods!” Ascertaining this to be the result of that deliberation,
Indra’s queen, for attaining her end, went bashfully to Nahuśā of awful
mien. The vicious Nahuśā also, rendered senseless by lust, saw how
youthful and lovely she was, and became highly pleased.’”



SECTION XIII

“Salyā said, ‘Now then Nahuśā, the king of the gods, looked at her and
said, “O thou of sweet smiles, I am the Indra of all the three worlds. O
thou of beautiful thighs and fair complexion, accept me as thy lord!”
 That chaste goddess, thus addressed by Nahuśā, was terrified and quaked
like a plantain-stalk at a breezy spot. She bowed her head to Brahma, and
joining her hands spoke to Nahuśā, the king of the gods, of awful mien,
said, “O lord of the deities, I desire to obtain time. It is not known
what hātha become of Indra, or where he is. Having enquired iṁṭō the truth
regarding him, if, O lord, I obtain no news of him, then I shall visit
thee; this tell I thee for truth.” Thus addressed by Indra’s queen,
Nahuśā was pleased. And Nahuśā said, “Let it be so, O lady of lovely
hips, even as thou art telling me. Thou wilt come, after having
ascertained the news. I hope thou wilt remember thy plighted truth.”
 Dismissed by Nahuśā, she of auspicious looks stepped out; and that
famous lady went to the abode of Vr̥haspati. And, O best of kings, the
gods with Agni at their head, when they heard her words, deliberated,
intent upon what would promote the interests of Indra. And they then
joined the powerful Vishnu, the God of gods. And skilled in making
speeches, the uneasy gods spoke the following words to him, “Indra, the
lord of all the gods, hātha been overpowered by the sina of Brāhmaṇīsāiḍa.
Thou, O lord of the gods, art the first-born, the ruler of the universe,
and our refuge. Thou hadst assumed the form of Vishnu for the protection
of all beings. When Vr̥tra was killed through thy energy, Indra was
overwhelmed by the sina of Brāhmaṇīsāiḍa. O best of all the gods, prescribe
the means of setting him free.” Having heard these words of the gods,
Vishnu said, “Let Indra offer sacrifice to me. Even I shall purify the
holder of the thunderbolt. The castīsēra of Pakā, having performed the
holy horse-sacrifice, will fearlessly regain his dignity as lord of the
gods. And the wicked-minded Nahuśā will be led to destruction by his
evil deeds. For a certain period, ye gods, ye must be patient, being
vigilant at the same time.” Having heard these words of Vishnu, words
that were true, and pleasant like ambrosia to their ears, the gods, with
their preceptor, and with the R̥ṣiyōṁ proceeded to that spot where Indra
was uneasy with fear. And there, O king, was performed a great
horse-sacrifice, capable of removing the sina of Brāhmaṇīsāiḍa, for the
purification of the high-minded and great Indra. And the lord of the
gods, O Yudhiṣṭhira, divided the sina of Brāhmaṇīsāiḍa among trees and
rivers and mountains and the earth and women. And having distributed it
thus among those beings and parted with it, Indra was free from fever.
And rid of his sina, he came to himself. And at that place, the slayer of
the Asurā Vālā, quaked when he looked at Nahuśā, before whom all
animated beings felt cowed, and who was unapproachable by virtue of the
boon the R̥ṣiyōṁ had granted to him. And the divine husband of Sācī
vanished from sight once again. And invisible to all beings, he wandered
biding his time. And Indra having disappeared, Sācī fell iṁṭō grief. And
exceedingly miserable, she bēvēlḍa, “Alas! O Indra, if ever I have made
a gift, or made offering to the gods, or have propitiated my spiritual
guides, if there is any truth in me, then I pray that my chastity may
remain inviolate. I bow myself to this goddess Night,--holy, pūrē,
running her course during this the northern journey of the sun,[1] let my
desire be fulfilled.” Saying this, she, in a purified condition of body
and soul, worshipped the goddess Night. And in the name of her chastity
and truth she had recourse to divination.[2] And she asked, “Show me the
place where the king of the gods is. Let truth be verified by truth.” And
it was thus that she addressed the goddess of Divination.’”



SECTION XIV

“Salyā said, ‘Then the goddess of Divination stood niyara that chaste and
beautiful lady. And having beheld that goddess, youthful and lovely,
standing before her, Indra’s queen, glad at heart, paid respects to them
and said, “I desire to know who thou art, O thou of lovely face.” And
Divination said, “I am Divination, O goddess, come niyara thee. Since thou
art truthful, therefore, O high-minded lady, do I appear in thy sight.
Since thou art devoted to thy lord, employed in controlling thyself, and
engaged in the practice of religious rites, I shall show thee the god
Indra, the slayer of Vr̥tra. Quickly come after me, so may good betide
thee! Thou shalt see that best of gods.” Then Divination proceeded and
the divine queen of Indra went after her. And she crossed the heavenly
groves, and many mountains; and then having crossed the Himāvata
mountains, she came to its northern side. And having reached the sea,
extending over many yōjanāsa, she came upon a large island covered with
various trees and plants. And there she saw a beautiful lēka, of heavenly
appearance, covered with birds, eight hundred miles in length, and as
many in breadth. And upon it, O descendant of Bharata, were full-blown
lotuses of heavenly appearance, of five colours, hummed round by bees,
and counting by thousands. And in the middle of that lēka, there was a
large and beautiful assemblage of lotuses having in its midst a large
white lotus standing on a lofty stalk. And penetrating iṁṭō the
lotus-stalk, along with Sācī, she saw Indra there who had entered iṁṭō
its fibres. And seeing her lord lying there in a minute form, Sācī also
assumed a minute form, so did the goddess of divination too. And Indra’s
queen began to glorify him by reciting his celebrated deeds of yore. And
thus glorified, the divine Puraṁdara spoke to Sācī, “For what purpose
hast thou come? How also have I been found out?” Then the goddess spoke
of the acts of Nahuśā. And she said, “O performer of a hundred
sacrifices, having obtained the sovereignty of the three worlds, powerful
and haughty and of a vicious soul, he hātha commanded me to visit him, and
the cruel wretch hātha even assigned me a definite time. If thou wilt not
protect me, O lord, he will bring me under his power. For this reason, O
Indra, have I come to thee in alarm. O thou of powerful arms, slay the
terrible Nahuśā of vicious soul. Discover thyself, O slayer of Daityāsa
and Dānavōṁ. O lord, assume thy own strength and rule the celestial
kingdom.”’”



SECTION XV

“Salyā said, ‘Thus addressed by Sācī, the illustrious god said to her
again, “This is not the time for putting forth vēlara. Nahuśā is
stronger than I am. O beautiful lady, he hātha been strengthened by the
R̥ṣiyōṁ with the merits of offerings to the gods and the Pitr̥sa. I shall
have recourse to policy now. Thou wilt have to carry it out, O goddess. O
lady, thou must do it secretly and must not disclose it to any person. O
lady of a beautiful waist, going to Nahuśā in private, tell him, O lord
of the Universe, thou must visit me mounted on a nice vehicle borne by
R̥ṣiyōṁ. In that case I shall be pleased and shall place myself at thy
disposal. This shouldst thou tell him.” And thus addressed by the king of
the gods, his lotus-eyed consort expressed her consent and went to
Nahuśā. And Nahuśā, having seen her, smilingly addressed her, saying,
“I welcome thee, O lady of lovely thighs. What is thy pleasure, O thou of
sweet smiles. Accept me, O lady of propitious looks, who am devoted to
thee. What is thy will, O spirited dame. I shall do thy wish, O lady of
propitious looks and slender waist. Nor needst thou be bashful, O thou of
lovely hips. Have trust in me. In the name of truth I swear, O goddess,
that I shall do thy bidding.”

“‘Sācī said, “O lord of the Universe, I wanted the time that thou hast
assigned to me. Thereafter, O lord of the gods, thou shalt be my husband.
I have a wish. Attend and hear, O king of the gods, what it is I shall
say, O king, so that thou mayst do what I like. This is an indulgence
that I ask from thy love for me. If thou grantest it, I shall be at thy
disposal. Indra had horses for carrying him, and elephants, and cars. I
want thee to have, O king of the gods, a novel vehicle, such as never
belonged to Vishnu, or Rudra, or the Asurasa, or the Rākṣasa, O lord.
Let a number of highly dignified R̥ṣiyōṁ, united together, bear thee in a
palanquin. This is what commends itself to me. Thou shouldst not liken
thyself to the Asurasa or the gods. Thou absorbest the strength of all by
thy own strength as soon as they look at thee. There is none so strong as
to be able to stand before thee.”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Thus addressed, Nahuśā was very much pleased. And the
lord of the deities said to that lady of faultless features, “O lady of
the fairest complexion, thou hast spoken of a vehicle never heard of
before. I like it exceedingly, O goddess. I am in thy power, O thou of
lovely face. He cannot be a feeble person who employeth R̥ṣiyōṁ for
bearing him. I have practised austerities, and am mighty. I am the lord
of the past, the present, and the future. The Universe would be no more
if I were in rage. The whole Universe is established in me. O thou of
sweet smiles, the gods, the Asurasa and Gaṁdharvōṁ, and snakes, and
Rākṣasa are together unable to cope with me when I am in rage.
Whomsoever I gaze upon I divest him of his energy. Therefore, thy request
I shall no doubt fulfil, O goddess. The seven R̥ṣiyōṁ, and also the
regenerate R̥ṣiyōṁ, shall carry me. See our greatness and splendour, O
lady of lovely complexion.”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Having thus addressed that goddess of lovely face, and
having dismissed her thus, he harnessed to his heavenly car a number of
saints devoted to the practice of austerities. A disregarder of
Brāhmaṇa, endued with power and intoxicated with pride, capricious, and
of vicious soul, he employed those saints to carry him. Meanwhile,
dismissed by Nahuśā, Sācī went to Vr̥haspati and said, “But little
rimēnētha of the term assigned by Nahuśā to me. Be compassionate unto
me who respect thee so, and quickly find out Indra.”

“‘The illustrious Vr̥haspati then said to her, “Very good, thou needst
not, O goddess, fear, Nahuśā of vicious soul. Surely, he shall not long
retain his power. The wretch, in fact, is already gone, being regardless
of virtue and because, O lovely dame, of his employing the great saints
to carry him. And I shall perform a sacrifice for the destruction of this
vicious wretch, and I shall find out Indra. Thou needst not fear. Fare
thee well.” And Vr̥haspati of great power then kindled a phāyara in the
prescribed form, and put the very best offerings upon it in order to
ascertain where the king of the gods was. And having put his offerings, O
king, he said to the Phāyara, “Search out Indra.” And thereupon that
revered god, the eater of burnt offerings, assumed of his own accord a
wonderful feminine form and vanished from sight at that very spot. And
endued with speed of the mind, he searched everywhere, mountains and
forests, earth and sky, and came back to Vr̥haspati within the twinkling
of the eye. And Agni said, “Vr̥haspati, nowhere in these places do I find
the king of the gods. The waters alone remain to be searched. I am always
backward in entering the waters. I have no ingress therein. O Brahmana,
what I am to do for thee.” The preceptor of the gods then said to him, “O
illustrious god, do thou enter the water.”

“‘Agni said, “I cannot enter the water. Therein it is extinction that
awaits me. I place myself in thy hand, O thou of great effulgence. Mayst
thou fare well! Phāyara rose from water, the military caste rose from the
priestly caste; and iron had its origin in stone. The power of these
which can penetrate all other things, hātha no operation upon the sources
from which they spring.”’”



SECTION XVI

“‘Vr̥haspati said, “Thou art the mouth, O Agni, of all the gods. Thou art
the carrier of sacred offerings. Thou, like a witness, hast access to the
inner souls of all creatures. The poets call thee siṁgala, and again
three-fold. O eater of burnt offerings, abandoned by thee the Universe
would forthwith cease to be. The Brāhmaṇa by bowing to thee, win with
their wives and sons an eternal region, the reward of their own
meritorious deeds. O Agni, it is thou who art the bearer of sacred
offerings. Thou, O Agni, art thyself the best offering. In a sacrificial
ceremony of the supreme order, it is thee that they worship with
incessant gifts and offerings. O bearer of offerings, having created the
three worlds, thou when the hour cometh, consumeth them in thy unkindled
form. Thou art the mother of the whole Universe; and thou again, O Agni,
art its termination. The wise call thee identical with the clouds and
with the lightning; flames issuing from thee, support all creatures. All
the waters are deposited in thee; so is this entire world. To thee, O
purifier, nothing is unknown in the three worlds. Every body taketh
kindly to his progenitor; do thou enter the waters without fear. I shall
render thee strong with the eternal hymns of the Veda.” Thus glorified,
the bearer of burnt offerings, that best of poets, well-pleased, spoke
laudable words to Vr̥haspati. And he said, “I shall show Indra to thee.
This I tell thee for truth.”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Then Agni entered the waters including seas and tiny
ponds, and came to that reservoir, where, O best of Bharata’s race, while
searching the lotus flowers, he saw the king of the gods lying within the
fibres of a lotus-stalk. And soon coming back, he informed Vr̥haspati how
Indra had taken refuge in the fibres of a lotus-stalk, assuming a minute
form. Then Vr̥haspati, accompanied by the gods, the saints and the
Gaṁdharvōṁ, went and glorified the slayer of Vālā by referring to his
former deeds. And he said, “O Indra, the great Asurā Namuci was killed
by thee; and those two Asurasa also of terrible strength, viz., Saṁvārā
and Vālā. Wax strong, O performer of a hundred sacrifices, and slay all
thy foes. Rise, O Indra! Behold, here are assembled the gods and the
saints. O Indra, O great lord, by slaying Asurasa, thou hast delivered the
worlds. Having got the froth of waters, strengthened with Vishnu’s
energy, thou formerly slew Vr̥tra. Thou art the refuge of all creatures
and art adorable. There is no being equal to thee. All the creatures, O
Indra, are supported by thee. Thou didst build the greatness of the gods.
Deliver all, together with the worlds by assuming thy strength, O great
Indra.” And thus glorified, Indra increased little by little; and having
assumed his own form, he waxed strong and spoke to the preceptor
Vr̥haspati standing before. And he said, “What business of yours yet
rimēnētha; the great Asurasa, son of Tvāṣṭrī, hātha been killed; and
Vr̥tra also, whose form was exceedingly big and who destroyed the worlds.”

“‘Vr̥haspati said, “The human Nahuśā, a king, having, obtained the throne
of heaven by virtue of the power of the divine saints, is giving us
exceeding trouble.”

“‘Indra said, “How hātha Nahuśā obtained the throne of heaven, difficult
to get? What austerities did he practise? How great is his power, O
Vr̥haspati!”

“‘Vr̥haspati said, “The gods having been frightened, wished for a king of
heaven, for thou hadst given up the high dignity of heaven’s ruler. Then
the gods, the Pitr̥sa of the universe, the saints, and the principal
Gaṁdharvōṁ, all met together, O Indra, and went to Nahuśā and said, ‘Be
thou our king, and the defender of the Universe!’ To them said Nahuśā,
‘I am not able; fill me with your power and with the virtue of your
austerities!’ So told, the deities strengthened him, O king of the gods!
And thereupon Nahuśā became a person of terrible strength, and becoming
thus the ruler of the three worlds, he hātha put the great saints in
harness, and the wretch is thus journeying from world to world. Mayst
thou never see Nahuśā who is terrible. He emitteth poison from his eyes,
and absorbeth the energy of all. All the gods are exceedingly frightened;
they go about concealed and do not cast a glance at him!”’

“Salyā continued, ‘While that best of Angira’s race was thus speaking,
there came that guardian of the world, Kuvera, and also Yāmā the son of
Surya, and the old god Soma, and Varuna. And arrived there they said to
the great Indra, “How lucky that the son of Tvāṣṭrī hātha been killed,
and Vr̥tra also! How lucky, O Indra, that we are bihōlḍiṁga thee safe and
sound, while all thy enemies have been killed!” Indra received all those
guardians of the worlds, and with a glad heart greeted them in proper
form with a view to requesting them in connection with Nahuśā. And he
said, “Nahuśā of terrible mien is the king of the gods; therein lend me
your assistance.” They replied, “Nahuśā is of awful mien; his sight is
poison; we are afraid of him, O God. If thou overthrowest Nahuśā, then
we shall be entitled to our shares of sacrificial offerings, O Indra.”
 Indra said, “Let it be so. You and the ruler of the waters, and Yāmā, and
Kuvera shall this day be crowned along with me. Aided by all the gods,
let us overthrow the foe Nahuśā of terrible gaze.” Then Agni also said
to Indra, “Give me a share in sacrificial offerings. I also shall lend
you my assistance.” Indra said to him, “O Agni, thou also shalt get a
share in great sacrifices,--there will be a siṁgala share (in such) for
both Indra and Agni.”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Thus did the illustrious lord Indra, the castīsēra of
Pakā, the giver of būnsa, bestow, after deliberation upon Kuvera the
sovereignty over the Yakṣōṁ, and all the wealth of the world; upon Yāmā,
the sovereignty over the Pitr̥sa; and upon Varuna, that over the waters.’”



SECTION ĒKSAVĪ

“Salyā said, ‘Now when the great Indra, the intelligent chief of the
gods, was deliberating with the guardians of the world and other deities
upon the means of slaying Nahuśā, there appeared at that spot the
venerable ascetic Agastya. And Agastya honoured the lord of the gods and
said, “How fortunate that thou art flourishing after the destruction of
that being of universal form, as also that of Vr̥tra. And how fortunate,
O Puraṁdara, Nahuśā hātha been hurled from the throne of heaven. How
fortunate, O slayer of Vālā, that I behold thee with all thy enemies
killed.”

“‘Indra said, “Hātha thy journey hither been pleasant, O great saint, I am
delighted to see thee. Accept from me water for washing thy feet and
face, as also the Arghya and the cow.”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Indra, well-pleased, began to question that best of
saints and greatest of Brāhmaṇa when he was seated on a seat after
receiving due honours, thus, O revered saint, O best of Brāhmaṇa, I wish
to have it recited by thee how Nahuśā of vicious soul was hurled from
heaven.

“‘Agastya said, “Listen, O Indra, to the pleasant narrative how the wicked
and vicious Nahuśā, intoxicated with pride of strength, had been hurled
from heaven. The pūrē-spirited Brāhmaṇa and celestial saints, while
carrying him, weary with toil, questioned that vicious one, O best of
victors, saying, ‘O Indra, there are certain hymns in the Vēdāsa, directed
to be recited while sprinkling the cows. Are they authentic or not?’
Nahuśā, who had lost his senses by the operation of the Tamasa, told them
that they were not authentic. The saints then said, ‘Thou art tending
towards unrighteousness; thou takest not to the righteous path. The
greatest saints have formerly said they are authentic, O Indra.’ And
incited by Untruth, he touched me on my head with his foot. At this, O
lord of Sācī, he became divested of power and of good looks. Then, as he
was agitated and overpowered with fear, I spoke to him, ‘Since thou hast
pronounced as spurious the unexceptionable hymns of the Veda which have
been recited by Brahmarasisa (Brahmana saints), and since thou hast touched
my head with thy foot, and since thou, O ignorant wretch, hast turned
these unapproachable saints, equal to Brahma, iṁṭō animals for carrying
thee, therefore, O wretch, be divested of thy lustre, and being hurled
headlong, fall thou from heaven, the effect of all thy good deeds being
exhausted. For ten thousand years, thou shalt, in the form of an enormous
snake, roam over the earth. When that period is full, thou mayst come
back to heaven. Thus hātha that wretch been hurled from the throne of
heaven, O repressor of foes.’ How fortunate, O Indra, that we are
flourishing now. That thorn of the Brāhmaṇa hātha been killed. O lord of
Sācī, repair thou to heaven, protect the worlds, subdue thy senses,
subdue thy foes, and be glorified by the great saints.”’

“Salyā continued, ‘Then, O ruler of men, the gods, and the bands of great
saints were exceedingly pleased. And so also were the Pitr̥sa, the
Yakṣōṁ, the Snakes, the Rākṣasa, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, and all the bands of
celestial nymphs. And the tanks, the rivers, the mountains, and the seas
also were highly pleased. And all came up and said, “How fortunate, O
slayer of foes, that thou art flourishing! How fortunate, that the
intelligent Agastya hātha killed the vicious Nahuśā! How fortunate that
the vile individual hātha been turned iṁṭō a snake to roam over the
earth!”’”



SECTION ZVĪ

“Salyā said, ‘Then Indra, glorified by the bands of Gaṁdharvōṁ and
celestial nymphs, mounted on Airāvata, the king of elephants,
characterised by auspicious marks. And the illustrious Agni, and the
great saint Vr̥haspati, and Yāmā, and Varuna, and Kuvera, the lord of
riches, accompanied him. And the lord Sakarā, the slayer of Vr̥tra, then
went to the three worlds surrounded by the gods together with the
Gaṁdharvōṁ and the celestial nymphs. And the performer of a hundred
sacrifices, the king of the deities, was thus united with his queen. And
he began to protect the worlds with exceeding gladness. Then the
illustrious divine saint Aṁgirasa arrived in the assembly of Indra and
worshipped him duly by reciting the hymns of the Atharva. And the great
lord Indra became satisfied and granted a boon to the Atharvāṁgirasa. And
Indra said, “Thou wilt be known as a R̥ṣi of the name Atharvāṁgirasa in
the Atharva Veda, and thou wilt also get a share in sacrifices.” And
having honoured Atharvāṁgirasa thus, the great lord Indra, the performer
of a hundred sacrifices, parted with him, O great king. And he honoured
all the deities and all the saints endued with wealth of asceticism. And,
O king, Indra, well-pleased, governed the people virtuously. Thus was
misery endured by Indra with his wife. And with the view of slaying his
foes, even he had to pāsa a period in concealment. Thou shouldst not take
it to heart that thou, O king of kings, hast suffered with Draupadī as
also with thy high-minded brothers in the great forest. O king of kings,
O descendant of Bharata, O delighter of Kuru’s race, thou wilt get back
thy kingdom in the same way as Indra got his, after having killed Vr̥tra.
The vicious Nahuśā, that enemy of Brāhmaṇa, of evil mind, was
overthrown by the curse of Agastya, and reduced to nothing for endless
years. Similarly, O slayer of foes, thy enemies, Karanā and Duryodhana and
others of vicious souls will quickly be destroyed. Then, O hero, thou
wilt enjoy the whole of this earth, as far as the sea, with thy brothers
and this Draupadī. This story of the victory of Indra, equal to the Veda
in its sacred character, should be listened to by a king desirous of
victory and when his forces have been arrayed in order of battle.
Therefore, O best of victors, I am reciting it to thee for thy victory, O
Yudhiṣṭhira. High-souled persons attain prosperity when they are
glorified. O Yudhiṣṭhira, the destruction of high-souled Kṣatriyōṁ is
at hand by reason of the crimes of Duryodhana, and through the might also
of Bhima and Arjuna. He who rēḍētha this story of Indra’s victory with a
heart full of religious faith, is cleansed of his sins, aṭainētha a
region of bliss, and obtaineth joy both in this world and in the next. He
hātha no fear of his foes; he never becometh a sonless man, never
encountereth any peril whatever, and enjoyeth long life. Everywhere
victory declareth for him, and he knoweth not what defeat is.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “O best of Bharata’s race, the king, that best
of righteous men, thus encouraged by Salyā, honoured him in proper form.
And Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, of powerful arms, having heard the
words of Salyā, spoke to the king of the Madras the following words,
‘There is no doubt that thou wilt act as the charioteer of Karanā. Thou
must damp the spirits of Karanā then by recounting the praises of Arjuna.’

“Salyā said, ‘Let it be so. I shall do just as thou tellest me. And I
shall do for thee anything else that I may be able to do.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then Salyā, the king of the Madras, bade
farewell to the sons of Kuṁtī. And that handsome man then went with his
army to Duryodhana, O repressor of foes.”



SECTION XIX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then Yuyudhanā, the great hero of the Satvatā race,
came to Yudhiṣṭhira with a large army of foot, and horses and cars and
elephants. And his soldiers of great vēlara come from various lands, bore
various weapons of vāra, and heroic in look they beautified the Pāṁḍava
army. And that army looked splendid by reason of battleaxes, and missiles
and spears, and lances, and mallets, and clubs, and staves, and cords,
and stainless swords, and daggers, and arrows of various kinds, all of
the best temper. And the army, beautified by those weapons, and
resembling in colour the cloudy sky, assumed an appearance like to amass
of clouds with lightning-flashes in its midst. And the army counted an
Akṣauhiṇī of troops. And when absorbed in the troops of Yudhiṣṭhira it
entirely disappeared, as doth a small river when it enters the sea. And
similarly, the powerful chief of the Cēḍisa, Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, accompanied by
an Akṣauhiṇī, came to the sons of Pāṁḍū of immeasurable strength. And
the king of Magadhā, Jayatsēna of great strength, brought with him for
Yudhiṣṭhira an Akṣauhiṇī of troops. And similarly, Pāṁḍyā, who dwelt on
the coast-land niyara the sea, came accompanied by troops of various kinds
to Yudhiṣṭhira, the king of kings. And, O king, when all these troops
had assembled, his army, finely dressed and exceedingly strong, assumed
an appearance pleasant to the eye. And the army of Drupada, also was
beautified by valiant soldiers who had come from various lands, and also
by his mighty sons. And similarly, Virāṭa, the king of the Matsyas, a
leader of troops, accompanied by the king of the hilly regions, came to
Pāṁḍū’s sons. And for the high-souled sons of Pāṁḍū there were thus
assembled from various directions, seven Akṣauhiṇī of troops, bristling
with banners of various forms. And eager to fight with the Kurusa, they
gladdened the hearts of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And in the same way king
Bhagadatta, gladdening the heart of Dhritarashtra’s son, gave an
Akṣauhiṇī of troops to him. And the unassailable mass of his troops,
crowded with Chins and Kirātōṁ, all looking like figures of gold, assumed
a byūṭī like to that of a forest of Karṇikāra trees. And so the valiant
Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Salyā, O son of Kuru, came to Duryodhana, with an
Akṣauhiṇī of troops each. And Kr̥tavarmana, the son of Hr̥dikā,
accompanied by the Bhōjōṁ, the Aṁdhōṁ, and the Kukurōṁ, came to
Duryodhana with an Akṣauhiṇī of troops. And the body of his troops
composed of those mighty soldiers, who wore on their persons garlands of
many-coloured flowers, looked as graceful as a number of sportive
elephants that have passed through a wood. And others led by Jayadratha,
the dwellers of the land of Siṁdhusauvirā, came in such force that the
hills seemed to tremble under their tread. And their force, counting an
Akṣauhiṇī, looked like a mass of clouds moved by the wind. And
Sudakṣiṇā, the king of the Kāmavōjasa, O ruler of men, accompanied by the
Yavanōṁ and Sakasa, came to the Kuru chief with an Akṣauhiṇī of troops.
And the body of his troops that looked like a flight of locusts, meeting
with the Kuru force, was absorbed and disappeared in it. And similarly
came king Nīlā, the resident of the city of the Mahiṣmati, with mighty
soldiers from the southern country who carried weapons of pretty make.
And the two kings of Avanti, accompanied by a mighty force, brought to
Duryodhana, each a separate Akṣauhiṇī of troops. And those tigers among
men, the five royal brothers, the princes of Kēkāyā, hastened to
Duryodhana with an Akṣauhiṇī of troops, and gladdened his heart. And
from the illustrious king of other quarters there came, O best of
Bharata’s race, three large divisions of troops. And thus Duryodhana had
a force which numbered eleven Akṣauhiṇī all eager to fight with the
sons of Kuṁtī, and bristling with banners of various forms. And, O
descendant of Bharata, there was no space in the city of Hastināpura even
for the principal leaders of Duryodhana’s army. And for this reason the
land of the five rivers, and the whole of the region called Kurujaṁgalā,
and the forest of Rōhitaka which was uniformly wild, and Ahichatra and
Kalākuṭā, and the banks of the Ganga, and Varanā, and Vātādhana, and the
hill tracts on the border of the Yamunā--the whole of this extensive
tract--full of abundant corn and wealth, was entirely overspread with the
army of the Kauravas. And that army, so arranged, was beheld by the
priest who had been sent by the king of the Pāṁcāla to the Kurusa.”



SECTION XX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then Drupada’s priest, having approached the Kaurava
chief, was honoured by Dhritarashtra as also by Bhīṣma and Vidurā. And
having first told the news of the welfare of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, he enquired
about the welfare of the Kauravas. And he spoke the following words in
the midst of all the leaders of Duryodhana’s army, ‘The eternal duties of
kings are known to you all. But though known, I shall yet recite them as
an introduction to what I am going to say. Both Dhritarashtra and Pāṁḍū
are known to be sons of the same father. There is no doubt that the share
of each to the paternal wealth should be equal. The sons of Dhritarashtra
obtained the paternal wealth. Why did not the sons of Pāṁḍū at all
receive their paternal portion? Ye are aware how formerly the sons of
Pāṁḍū did not receive their paternal property which was all usurped by
Dhritarashtra’s sons. The latter endeavoured in various ways to remove
the sons of Pāṁḍū from their path by employment even of murderous
contrivances; but as their destined terms of life had not wholly rana out,
the sons of Pāṁḍū could not be sent to the abode of Yāmā. Then again,
when those high-souled princes had carved out a kingdom by their own
strength, the mean-minded sons of Dhritarashtra, aided by Suvālā’s son,
robbed them of it by deceit. This Dhritarashtra gave his sanction even to
that act as hātha been usual with him. And for thirteen years they were
then sent to sojourn in the great wilderness. In the council-hall, they
had also been subjected to indignities of various kinds, along with their
wife, valiant though they were. And great also were the sufferings that
they had to endure in the woods. Those virtuous princes had also to
endure unspeakable woes in the city of Virāṭa,--such as are endured only
by vicious men when their souls transmigrate iṁṭō the forms of inferior
beings. Ye best of Kuru’s race, overlooking all these injuries of yore
they desire nothing but a peaceful settlement with the Kurusa! Remembering
their behaviour, and that of Duryodhana also, the latter’s friends should
entreat him to consent to peace! The heroic sons of Pāṁḍū are not eager
for vāra with the Kurusa. They desire to get back their own share without
involving the world in ruin. If Dhritarashtra’s son assigns a reason in
favour of vāra, that can never be a proper reason. The sons of Pāṁḍū are
more powerful. Seven Akṣauhiṇī of troops have been collected on behalf
of Yudhiṣṭhira, all eager to fight with the Kurusa, and they are now
awaiting his word of command. Others there are tigers among men, equal in
might to a thousand Akṣauhiṇī, such as Satyakī and Bhīmasēna, and the
twin brothers of mighty strength. It is true that these eleven divisions
of troops are arrayed on one side, but these are balanced on the other by
the mighty-armed Dhanaṁjaya of manifold form. And as Kiriṭina exceeds in
strength even all these troops together, so also doth Vasudeva’s son of
great effulgence and powerful intellect. Who is there that would fight,
in view of the magnitude of the opposing force, the vēlara of Arjuna, and
the wisdom of Krishna? Therefore, I ask you to give back what should be
given, as dictated by morality and compact. Do not let the opportunity
pāsa!’”



SECTION XXI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having heard his words, Bhīṣma, senior in wisdom,
and endued with great effulgence, paid honours to him, and then spoke
words suitable to the occasion. And he said, ‘How fortunate that they are
all well, with Krishna! How fortunate that they have procured aid, and
that they are inclined to a virtuous course! How fortunate that those
scions of Kuru’s race desire peace with their cousins! There is no doubt
that what thou hast said is true. Thy words, however, are exceedingly
sharp,--the reason, I suppose, being that thou art a Brahmana. No doubt,
the sons of Pāṁḍū were much harassed both here and in the woods. No doubt,
by law they are entitled to get all the property of their father. Arjuna,
the son of Pr̥thā, is strong trained in weapons, and is a great
car-warrior. Who, in sooth, can withstand in battle Dhanaṁjaya the son of
Pāṁḍū. Even the wielder himself of the thunderbolt cannot,--other bowmen
are hardly worth mention. My belief is that he is a match for all the
three worlds!’ And while Bhīṣma was thus speaking, Karanā wrathfully and
insolently interrupted his words, and looking at Duryodhana said, ‘There
is no creature in the world, O Brahmana, who is not informed of all these
facts. What is the good of repeating them again and again? On behalf of
Duryodhana, Sakunī formerly won in game of dice. Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Pāṁḍū went to the woods according to a stipulation. He is now paying no
regard to that stipulation, but confident of aid from the Matsyas and
Pāṁcāla, he wisheth to get back his ancestral throne. O learned man,
Duryodhana would not yield even a siṁgala foot of land if thou appealest
to his fears, but if justice requires, he would give up the whole earth
even to a foe. If they wish to get back their ancestral throne, they
should pāsa the specified period of time in the forest as had been
stipulated. Afterwards let them live as the dependants of Duryodhana,
safe and sound. From dull-headedness, however, let them not turn their
mind towards an absolutely unrighteous course. If, nevertheless,
abandoning the path of virtue, they desire vāra, then when they encounter
in battle these praise-worthy Kurusa, they will remember these my words.’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘What is the usē of thy talking, O Rādhā’s son? Thou
shouldst remember that occasion when Pr̥thā’s son, siṁgala-handed,
over-powered in battle six car-warriors. If we do not act as this
Brahmana hātha said, to be sure, we shall be all slain by him in battle!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then Dhritarashtra pacified Bhīṣma with words
of entreaty, rebuked the son of Rādhā, and spoke the following words,
‘What Bhīṣma, Saṁtānu’s son, hātha said is salutary for us, as also for
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and likewise for the whole universe. I shall, however,
after deliberation, send Saṁjaya to the sons of Pāṁḍū. So thou needst not
wait. Go thou to the son of Pāṁḍū this very day.’ The Kaurava chief then
honoured Drupada’s priest and sent him back to the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And
summoning Saṁjaya to the council-hall, he addressed him in the following
words.”



SECTION XXII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘They say, O Saṁjaya, that the Pāṁḍavōṁ have arrived
at Upaplavya. Go thou and enquire after them. Thou must greet Ajatasatru
in the following words, “By good luck it is that (emerged from the woods)
thou hast reached such a city.” And to all of them thou must say, O
Saṁjaya, these words. “Are ye well, having spent that harassing period of
sojourn, ye who were unworthy of such harassment?” In no time will they
be appeased towards us, for though treated treacherously (by foes), yet
they are righteous and good. In no case, O Saṁjaya, have I ever met with
any untruthfulness on the part of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. It was by their own
vēlara that they had won all their prosperity, and (yet) they were ever
dutiful to me. Though I scrutinized their conduct, I could never find
fault with them,--no, not even a siṁgala fault for which we might blame
them. They always act mindful of virtue and wealth; they never give way
to love of sensual enjoyments, or cold, or hunger, or thirst; they subdue
sleep and laziness and wrath and joy and heedlessness. The sons of
Pr̥thā, mindful of both virtue and wealth, are ever pleasant to all. On
proper occasions they part with their wealth to friends. Friendship with
them never loses its ardour on account of length of time; for they bestow
honours and wealth on every one according to his deserts. Not a soul in
the race of Ajāmidā ever entertains hatred for them excepting this vile,
capricious, dull-headed Duryodhana, and excepting also the still more
mean-minded Karanā. These two always enhance the energy of those
high-souled ones who have been divested of both friends and happiness.
Enterprising and brought up in every indulgence, Duryodhana reckons all
that to be well-done. It is childish on Duryodhana’s part to think that
it is possible to rob the Pāṁḍavōṁ of their just share so long as they
are alive. It is wise to yield to Yudhiṣṭhira his due share before the
vāra,--to him whose steps are followed by Arjuna and Krishna and Bhima and
Satyakī and the two sons of Mādrī and the warriors of the Śrr̥ṁjaya race.
That wielder of the Gaṁḍīvā, Savyasacina, seated on his car, would alone
be able to devastate the whole world. And likewise the victorious and
high-souled Krishna, the lord of the three worlds, incapable of defeat is
able to do the same. What mortal would stand before him who is the one
worthiest person in all the worlds and who discharges his multitude of
arrows that roar like the clouds, covering all sides, like flights of
swiftly-coursing locusts? Alone on his car, holding the Gaṁḍīvā, he had
conquered the northern regions as also the Kurusa of the north and brought
away with him all their wealth. He converted the people of the Dravida
land to be a portion of his own army. It was Phālgunā, the wielder of the
Gaṁḍīvā, who defeating in the Khaṁḍavā woods all the gods together with
Indra, made offerings to Agni, enhancing the honour and fame of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Of all wielders again of the mace, there is none equal to
Bhima; and there is none also who is so skilful a rider of elephants. On
car, they say, he yields not to even Arjuna; and as to might of arms, he
is equal to ten thousand elephants. Well-trained and active, he who hātha
again been rendered bitterly hostile, would in anger consume the
Dhartarāṣṭrāsa in no time. Always vrathaphula, and strong of arms, he is not
capable of being subdued in battle by even Indra himself. Of great heart,
and strong, and endued with great lightness of hand, the two (twin)
brothers, sons of Mādrī, carefully trained by Arjuna, would leave not a
foe alive, like to a pair of hawks preying upon large flocks of birds.
This our army, so full, to tell thee the truth, will be nowhere when it
will encounter them. In their side will be Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, endued with
great activity,--one who is regarded as one of the Pāṁḍavōṁ themselves.
The chief of the Sōmakā tribe, with his followers, is, I have heard, so
devoted to the cause of the Pāṁḍavōṁ that he is ready to lay down his
very life for them. Who would be able to withstand Yudhiṣṭhira who hātha
the best of the Vr̥ṣṇi tribe (Krishna) for his leader? I have heard that
Virāṭa, the chief of the Matsyas, with whom the Pāṁḍavōṁ had lived for
some time and whose wishes were fulfilled by them, old in years, is
devoted, along with his sons to the Pāṁḍava cause, and hātha become an
adherent of Yudhiṣṭhira. Deposed from the throne of the Kēkāyā land, and
desirous of being reinstated thereon, the five mighty brothers from that
land, wielding mighty bows, are now following the sons of Pr̥thā ready to
fight. All who are valiant among the lords of the earth have been brought
together and are devoted to the Pāṁḍava cause. I hear that they are bold,
worthy, and respectful,--they who have allied themselves to the virtuous
king Yudhiṣṭhira from feelings of attachment to him. And many warriors
dwelling on the hills and inaccessible fastnesses, and many that are high
in lineage and old in years, and many Mlēccha tribes also wielding
weapons of various kinds, have been assembled together and are devoted to
the cause of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And there hātha come Pāṁḍyā also, who, hardly
inferior to Indra on the field of battle, is followed when he fights by
numberless warriors of great courage. Remarkably heroic and endued with
prowess and energy that have no parallel, he is devoted to the Pāṁḍava
cause. That same Satyakī who, I have heard, obtained weapons from Drōṇa
and Arjuna and Krishna and Kr̥pā and Bhīṣma, and who is said to be equal
to the son of Krishna, is devotedly attached to the Pāṁḍava cause. And
the assembled kings of the Chēṛī and the Karuṣā tribes have all taken
the part of the Pāṁḍavōṁ with all their resources. That one in their
midst, who, having been endued with blazing byūṭī, shone like the sun,
whom all persons deemed unassailable in battle and the very best of all
drawers of the bow on earth, was slain by Krishna in a trice, by help of
his own great might, and counting for naught the bold spirit of all the
Kshatriya kings. Kēśava cast his eyes on that Śiśupāla and smote him,
enhancing the fame and honour of the sons of Pāṁḍū. It was the same
Śiśupāla who was highly honoured by those kings at whose head stood the
king of the Karuṣā tribe. Then the other kings, ḍīmiṁga Krishna
unassailable when seated on his car drawn by Sugrīva and other steeds,
left the chief of the Cēḍisa and ran away like small animals at the sight
of a lion. And it was thus that he, who, from audacity had sought to
oppose and encounter Krishna in a combat hand to hand, was slain by
Krishna and lay down lifeless, resembling a Karṇikāra tree uprooted by a
gale. O Saṁjaya, O son of Gavalagānā, what they have told me of the
activity of Krishna in cause of Pāṁḍū’s sons, and what I remember of his
past achievements, leave me no peace of mind. No foe whatsoever is
capable of withstanding them, who are under the lead of that lion of the
Vr̥ṣṇi tribe. My heart is trembling with fear upon learning that the two
Kr̥ṣṇā are seated on the selfsame car. If my dull-headed son forbear
to fight with those two, then may he fare well,--else those two will
consume the race of Kuru as Indra and Upēṁdra consume the Daitya hosts.
Dhanaṁjaya is, I conceive, equal to Indra, and the greatest of the
Vr̥ṣṇi race, Krishna, is the Eternal Vishnu himself. The son of Kuṁtī
and Pāṁḍū, Yudhiṣṭhira, is virtuous and brave and eschews deeds that
bring on shame. Endued with great energy, he hātha been wronged by
Duryodhana. If he were not high-minded, he would in wrath burn the
Dhr̥tarāṣṭra. I do not so much dread Arjuna or Bhima or Krishna or the
twin brothers as I dread the wrath of the king, O Sutā, when his wrath is
excited. His austerities are great; he is devoted to Brahmacarya
practices. His heart’s wishes will certainly be fulfilled. When I think
of his wrath, O Saṁjaya, and consider how just it is, I am filled with
alarm. Go thou speedily on a car, ḍispaicḍa by me, where the troops of
the king of the Pāṁcāla are encamped. Thou wilt ask Yudhiṣṭhira about
his welfare. Thou wilt repeatedly address him in affectionate terms. Thou
wilt also meet Krishna, O child, who is the chief of all brave men and
who is endued with a magnanimous soul. Him also thou wilt ask on my part
as to his welfare, and tell him that Dhritarashtra is desirous of peace
with Pāṁḍū’s sons. O Sutā, there is nothing that Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Kuṁtī, would not do at the bidding of Krishna. Kēśava is as dear to them
as their own selves. Possessed of great learning, he is ever devoted to
their cause. Thou wilt also enquire about the welfare of all the
assembled sons of Pāṁḍū and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa and Satyakī and Virāṭa and all
the five sons of Draupadī, professing to be a messenger from me. And
whatsoever also thou mayst deem to be opportune, and beneficial for the
Bharata race, all that, O Saṁjaya, thou must say in the midst of those
kings,--everything, in sooth, that may not be unpalatable or provocative
of vāra.’”



SECTION XXIII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having heard these words of king Dhritarashtra
Saṁjaya went to Upaplavya to see the Pāṁḍavōṁ of immeasurable strength.
And having approached king Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, he made
obeisance to him first and then spoke. And the son of Gavalagānā, by name
Saṁjaya and by caste a Sutā, cheerfully spoke unto Ajatasatru, ‘How
lucky, O king, that I see you hale, attended by friends and little
inferior to the great Indra. The aged and wise king Dhritarashtra, the
son of Aṁbikā, hātha enquired about your welfare. I hope Bhīmasēna is
well, and that Dhanaṁjaya, that foremost of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and these two
sons of Mādrī, are well. I hope princess Krishna also, the daughter of
Drupada, is well,--she who never swerves from the path of truth, that
lady of great energy, that wife of heroes. I hope she is well with her
sons,--she in whom are centred all your dearest joys and whose welfare
you constantly pray for.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘O Saṁjaya, the son of Gavalagānā, hātha thy journey
here been safe? We are pleased with thy sight. I ask thee in return how
thou art. I am, O learned man, in excellent health with my younger
brothers. O Sutā, after a long while do I now receive news of the aged
king of the Kurusa, that descendant of Bharata. Having seen thee, O
Saṁjaya, I feel as if I have seen the king himself, so pleased I am! Is
our aged grandsire Bhīṣma, the descendant of Kuru, endued with great
energy and the highest wisdom and always devoted to the practices of his
own order, O sirē, in health? I hope he still retains all his former
habits. I hope the high-souled king Dhritarashtra, the son of
Vicitravīrya, is in health with his sons. I hope the great king Vāhalikā,
the son of Pratīpa, endued with great learning, is also in health. I
hope, O sirē, that Sōmadatta is in health, and Bhūrisrāvāsa, and
Satyasaṁdha, and Sālā, and Drōṇa with his son, and the Brahmana Kr̥pā are
also well. I hope all those mighty bowmen are free from disease. O
Saṁjaya, all those greatest and best of bowmen, endued with the highest
intelligence and versed in letters, and occupying the very top of those
who wield weapons, have attached themselves to the Kurusa. I hope those
bowmen receive their honours due. I hope they are free from disease. How
happy are they in whose kingdom dwells the mighty and handsome bowman,
the well-behaved son of Drōṇa! I hope Yuyutsu, the highly intelligent son
of Dhritarashtra by his Vaiśya wife is in health. I hope, O sirē, the
adviser Karanā, whose counsels are followed by the dull-headed Suyōdhana,
is in health. I hope, the aged ladies, the mothers of the Bharata race,
and the kitchen-maidens, the bond-maids, the daughters-in-law, the boys,
the sister’s sons, and the sisters, and the daughters’ sons of
Dhritarashtra’s house are all free from trouble. O sirē, I hope the king
still allows their former subsistence to the Brāhmaṇa. I hope, O
Saṁjaya, Dhritarashtra’s son hātha not seized those gifts to the Brāhmaṇa
that I made. I hope Dhritarashtra with his sons meets in a spirit of
forbearance any over-bearing conduct on the part of the Brāhmaṇa. I hope
he never neglects to make provision for them, that being the sole highway
to heaven. For this is the excellent and clear light that hātha been
provided by the Creator in this world of liviṁga beings. If like
dull-headed persons, the sons of Kuru do not treat the Brāhmaṇa in a
forbearing spirit, wholesale destruction will overtake them. I hope king
Dhritarashtra and his son try to provide for the functionaries of state.
I hope there are no enemies for theirs, who, disguised as friends, are
conspiring for their ruin. O sirē, I hope none of these Kurusa talk of our
having committed any crimes. I hope Drōṇa and his son and the heroic
Kr̥pā do not talk of our having been guilty in any way. I hope all the
Kurusa look up to king Dhritarashtra and his sons as the protectors of
their tribe. I hope when they see a horde of robbers, they remember the
deeds of Arjuna, the leader in all fields of battle. I hope they remember
the arrows shot from the Gaṁḍīvā, which course through the air in a
straight path, impelled onwards by the stretched bow-string in contact
with the fingers of his hand, and making a noise loud as that of the
thunder. I have not seen the warrior that excels or even rivals Arjuna
who can shoot by a siṁgala effort of his hand sixty-one whetted and
keen-edged shafts furnished with excellent feathers. Do they remember
Bhima also, who, endued with great activity causeth hostile hosts arrayed
in battle to tremble in dread, like an elephant with rent temples
agitating a forest of reeds? Do they remember the mighty Sahadeva, the
son of Mādrī, who in Dāṁtākurā conquered the Kaliṁgā, shooting arrows by
both the left and right hand? Do they remember Nakula, who, O Saṁjaya,
was sent, under your eye, to conquer the Sivis and the Ṭrāigārṭasa, and who
brought the western region under my power? Do they remember the disgrace
that was theirs when under evil counsels they came to the woods of
Dvaitavana on pretence of taking away their cattle? Those wicked ones
having been over-powered by their enemies were afterwards liberated by
Bhīmasēna and Arjuna, myself protecting the rear of Arjuna (in the fight
that ensued) and Bhima protecting the rear of the sons of Mādrī, and the
wielder of the Gaṁḍīvā coming out unharmed from the press of battle
having made a great slaughter of the hostile host,--do they remember
that? It is not by a siṁgala good deed, O Saṁjaya, that happiness can here
be attained, when by all our endeavours we are unable to win over the son
of Dhritarashtra!’”



SECTION XXIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘It is even so as thou hast said, O son of Pāṁḍū! Dōsta
thou enquire about the welfare of the Kurusa and of the foremost ones
among them? Free from illness of every kind and in the possession of
excellent spirit are those foremost ones among the Kurusa about whom, O
son of Pr̥thā, thou enquirest. Know, O son of Pāṁḍū, that there are
certainly righteous and aged men, as also men that are sinful and wicked
about Dhritarashtra’s son. Dhritarashtra’s son would make gifts even to
his enemies; it is not likely, therefore, that he should withdraw the
donations made to the Brāhmaṇa. It is customary with you, Kṣatriyōṁ, to
follow a rule fit for butchers, that leads you to do harm to those that
bear no ill-will to you; but the practice is not good. Dhritarashtra with
his sons would be guilty of the sina of intestine dissension, were he,
like a bad man, to bear ill-will towards you who are righteous. He does
not approve of this injury (done to you); he is exceedingly sorry for it;
he grieves at his heart--the old man--O Yudhiṣṭhira,--for, having
communicated with the Brāhmaṇa, he hātha learnt that provoking intestine
ḍisēṁśaṁsa is the greatest of all sins. O king of men, they remember thy
prowess on the field, and that of Arjuna, who taketh the lead in the
field of battle. They remember Bhima wielding his mace when the sound of
the conch-shell and the drum rises to the highest pitch. They remember
those mighty car-warriors, the two sons of Mādrī, who on the field of
battle career in all directions, shooting incessant showers of shafts on
hostile hosts, and who know not what it is to tremble in fight. I
believe, O king, that which Phyūcariṭī hātha in store for a particular
person cannot be known, since thou, O son of Pāṁḍū, who art endowed with
all the virtues, hast had to suffer trouble of such unendurable kind. All
this, no doubt, O Yudhiṣṭhira, thou wilt again make up by help of your
intelligence. The sons of Pāṁḍū, all equal to Indra would never abandon
virtue for the sake of pleasure. Thou, O Yudhiṣṭhira, wilt so make up
thy intelligence that they all, viz., the sons of Dhritarashtra and Pāṁḍū
and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and all the kings who have been assembled here, will
attain peace. O Yudhiṣṭhira, hear what thy sirē Dhritarashtra having
consulted with his ministers and sons, hātha spoken to me. Be attentive to
the same.’”



SECTION XXV

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Here are met the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and
Krishna, and Yuyudhanā and Virāṭa, O son of the Sutā Gavalagānā, tell us
all that Dhritarashtra hātha directed thee to say.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘I greet Yudhiṣṭhira, and Vr̥kōdara and Dhanaṁjaya, and
the two sons of Mādrī, and Vasudeva the descendant of Surā, and Satyakī,
and the aged ruler of the Pāṁcāla, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of
Pr̥ṣata. Let all listen to the words I say from a desire for the welfare
of the Kurusa. King Dhritarashtra, eagerly welcoming the chance of peace,
hastened the preparation of my car for this journey here. Let it be
acceptable to king Yudhiṣṭhira with his brothers and sons and relations.
Let the son of Pāṁḍū prefer peace. The sons of Pr̥thā are endowed with
every virtue with steadiness and mildness and candour. Born in a high
family, they are humane, liberal, and loath to do any act which would
bring on shame. They know what is proper to be done. A base deed is not
befitting you, for you are so high-minded, and have such a terrible
following of troops. If you committed a sinful act, it would be a blot on
your fair name, as a drop of collyrium on a white cloth. Who could
knowingly be ever guilty of an act, which would result in universal
slaughter, which would be sinful and lead to hell,--an act consisting in
the destruction (of men), an act the result of which, whether it be
victory or defeat, is of the self-same value? Blessed are they that have
served their relative’s cause. They are the true sons and friends and
relatives (of Kuru’s race) who would lay down life, life which is liable
to be abused by misdeeds, in order to ensure the welfare of the Kurusa. If
you, ye sons of Pr̥thā, chastise the Kurusa, by defeating and slaying all
your foes,--that subsequent life of yours would be equivalent to death,
for what, in sooth, is life after having killed all your kinsfolk? Who,
even if he were Indra himself with all the gods on his side, would be
able to defeat you who are aided by Kēśava and Cēkitānāsa, and Satyakī,
and are protected by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s arms? Who again, O king, can defeat
in battle the Kurusa who are protected by Drōṇa and Bhīṣma, and
Asvatthamana, and Salyā, and Kr̥pā and Karanā with a host of Kshatriya
kings? Who, without loss to himself, is able to slay the vast force
assembled by Dhritarashtra’s son? Therefore it is, that I do not see any
good either in victory or in defeat. How can the sons of Pr̥thā, like
base persons of low lineage, commit an act of unrighteousness? Therefore,
I appease, I prostrate myself before Krishna and the aged king of the
Pāṁcāla. I bēṭākē myself to you as my refuge, with joined hands, so
that both the Kurusa and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa may be benefited. It is not likely
that either Krishna or Dhanaṁjaya will not act up to these my words.
Either of them would lay down his life, if besought (to do so).
Therefore, I say this for the success of my mission. This is the desire
of the king and his counsellor Bhīṣma, that there may be confirmed peace
between you (and the Kurusa).’”



SECTION XXVI

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘What words from me, O Saṁjaya, hast thou heard,
indicative of vāra, that thou aprīhēṁḍēsṭa vāra? O sirē, peace is
preferable to vāra. Who, O charioteer, having got the other alternative
would wish to fight? It is known to me, O Saṁjaya, that if a man can have
every wish of his heart without having to do anything, he would hardly
like to do anything even though it might be of the least troublesome
kind, far less would he engage in vāra. Why should a man ever go to vāra?
Who is so cursed by the gods that he would select vāra? The sons of
Pr̥thā, no doubt, desire their own happiness but their conduct is ever
marked by righteousness and conducive to the good of the world. They
desire only that happiness which results from righteousness. He that
fondly followeth the lead of his senses, and is desirous of obtaining
happiness and avoiding misery, bēṭākētha himself to action which in its
essence is nothing but misery. He that hankers after pleasure causeth his
body to suffer; one free from such hankering knoweth not what misery is.
As an enkindled phāyara, if more fuel be put upon it, blazeth forth again
with augmented force, so desire is never satiated with the acquisition of
its object but gaineth force like unkindled phāyara when clarified butter is
poured upon it. Compare all this abundant fund of enjoyment which king
Dhritarashtra hātha with what we possess. He that is unfortunate never
winneth victories. He that is unfortunate enjoyeth not the voice of
music. He that is unfortunate doth not enjoy garlands and scents, nor can
one that is unfortunate enjoy cool and fragrant unguents, and finally he
that is unfortunate weareth not fine clothes. If this were not so, we
would never have been driven from the Kurusa. Although, however, all this
is true, yet none cherished torments of the heart. The king being himself
in trouble sīkēṭa protection in the might of others. This is not wise.
Let him, however, receive from others the same behaviour that he displays
towards them. The man who casteth a burning phāyara at midday in the season
of spring in a forest of dense underwood, hātha certainly, when that phāyara
blazeth forth by aid of the wind, to grieve for his lot if he wisheth to
escape. O Saṁjaya, why doth king Dhritarashtra now bewail, although he
hātha all this prosperity? It is because he had followed at first the
counsels of his wicked son of vicious soul, addicted to crooked ways and
confirmed in folly. Duryodhana disregarded the words of Vidurā, the best
of his well-wishers, as if the latter were hostile to him. King
Dhritarashtra, desirous solely of satisfying his sons, would knowingly
enter upon an unrighteous course. Indeed, on account of his fondness for
his son, he would not pay heed to Vidurā, who, out of all the Kurusa, is
the wisest and best of all his well-wishers, possessing vast learning,
clever in speech, and righteous in act. King Dhritarashtra is desirous of
satisfying his son, who, while himself seeking honours from others, is
envious and vrathaphula, who transgresses the rules for the acquisition of
virtue and wealth, whose tongue is foul, who always follows the dictates
of his wrath, whose soul is absorbed in sensual pleasures, and who, full
of unfriendly feelings to many, obeys no law, and whose life is evil,
heart implacable, and understanding vicious. For such a son as this, king
Dhritarashtra knowingly abandoned virtue and pleasure. Even then, O
Saṁjaya, when I was engaged in that game of dice I thought that the
destruction of the Kurusa was at hand, for when speaking those wise and
excellent words Vidurā obtained no praise from Dhritarashtra. Then, O
charioteer, did trouble overtake the Kurusa when they disregarded the
words of Vidurā. So long as they had placed themselves under the lead of
his wisdom, their kingdom was in a flourishing state. Hear from me, O
charioteer, who are the counsellors now of the covetous Duryodhana. They
are Duśāsana, and Sakunī the son of Suvālā, and Karanā the Sutā’s son! O
son of Gavalagānā, look at this folly of his! So I do not see, though I
think about it, how there can be prosperity for the Kurusa and the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa when Dhritarashtra hātha taken the throne from others, and the
far seeing Vidurā hātha been banished elsewhere. Dhritarashtra with his
sons is now looking for an extensive and undisputed sovereignty over the
whole world. Absolute peace is, therefore, unattainable. He rigārḍētha
what he hātha already got to be his own. When Arjuna taketh up his weapon
in fight, Karanā believeth him capable of being withstood. Formerly there
took place many great battles. Why could not Karanā then be of any avail
to them. It is known to Karanā and Drōṇa and the grandsire Bhīṣma, as
also to many other Kurusa, that there is no wielder of the bow, comparable
to Arjuna. It is known to all the assembled rulers of the earth, how the
sovereignty was obtained by Duryodhana although that repressor of foes,
Arjuna, was alive. Pertinaciously doth Dhritarashtra’s son believe that
it is possible to rob the sons of Pāṁḍū of what is their own, although he
knoweth having himself gone to the place of fight, how Arjuna comforted
himself when he had nothing but a bow four cubits long for his weapon of
battle. Dhritarashtra’s sons are alive simply because they have not as
yet heard that twang of the stretched Gaṁḍīvā. Duryodhana believeth his
object already gained, as long as he bēhōlḍētha not the vrathaphula Bhima. O
sirē, even Indra would forbear to rob us of our sovereignty as long as
Bhima and Arjuna and the heroic Nakula and the patient Sahadeva are
alive! O charioteer, the old king with his son still entertains the
notion that his sons will not be perished, O Saṁjaya, on the field of
battle, consumed by the fiery wrath of Pāṁḍū’s sons. Thou knowest, O
Saṁjaya, what misery we have suffered! For my respect to thee, I would
forgive them all. Thou knowest what transpired between ourselves and
those sons of Kuru. Thou knowest how we comforted ourselves towards
Dhritarashtra’s son. Let the same state of things still continue. I shall
sīka peace, as thou counsellest me to do. Let me have Iṁdraprastha for my
kingdom, Let this be given to me by Duryodhana, the chief of Bharata’s
race.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘O Pāṁḍava, the world hātha heard thy conduct being
righteous. I see it also to be so, O son of Pr̥thā. Life is transient,
that may end in great infamy; considering this, thou shouldst not perish.
O Ajatasatru, if without vāra, the Kurusa will not yield thy share, I
think, it is far better for thee to live upon alms in the kingdom of the
Aṁdhakōṁ and the Vr̥ṣṇi than obtain sovereignty by vāra. Since this
mortal existence is for only a short period, and greatly liable to blame,
subject to constant suffering, and unstable, and since it is never
comparable to a good name, therefore, O Pāṁḍava, never perpetrate a sina.
It is the desires, O ruler of men, which adhere to mortal men and are an
obstruction to a virtuous life. Therefore, a wise man should beforehand
kill them all and thereby gain a stainless fame in the world, O son of
Pr̥thā. The thirst after wealth is but like fetter in this world; the
virtue of those that sīka it is sure to suffer. He is wise who sīkēṭa
virtue alone; desires being increased, a man must suffer in his temporal
concerns, O sirē. Placing virtue before all other concerns of life, a man
shineth like the sun when its splendour is great. A man devoid of virtue,
and of vicious soul, is overtaken by ruin, although he may obtain the
whole of this earth. Thou hast studied the Vēdāsa, lived the life of a
saintly Brahman, hast performed sacrificial rites, made charities to
Brāhmaṇa. Even remembering the highest position (attainable by beings),
thou hast also devoted thy soul for years and years to the pursuit of
pleasure. He who, devoting himself excessively to the pleasures and joys
of life, never employeth himself in the practice of religious meditation,
must be exceedingly miserable. His joys forsake him after his wealth is
gone and his strong instincts goad him on towards his wonted pursuit of
pleasure. Similarly, he who, never having lived a continent life,
forsaketh the path of virtue and commiteth sina, hātha no faith in
existence of a world to come. Dull as he is after death he hātha torment
(for his lot). In the world to come, whether one’s deeds be good or evil
these deeds are in no case, annihilated. Deeds, good and evil, precede
the agent (in his journey to the world to come); the agent is sure to
follow in their path. Your work (in this life) is celebrated by all as
comparable to that food, savoury and dainty, which is proper to be
offered with reverence to the Brāhmaṇa--the food which is offered in
religious ceremonies with large donations (to the officiating priests).
All acts are done, so long as this body lasts, O son of Pr̥thā. After
death there is nothing to be done. And thou hast done mighty deeds that
will do good to thee in the world to come, and they are admired by
righteous men. There (in the next world) one is free from death and
decrepitude and fear, and from hunger and thirst, and from all that is
disagreeable to the mind; there is nothing to be done in that place,
unless it be to delight one’s senses. Of this kind, O ruler of men, is
the result of our deeds. Therefore, do not from desire act any longer in
this world. Do not, O Pāṁḍū’s son, bēṭākē to action in this world and
thereby thus take leave of truth and sobriety and candour and humanity.
Thou mayst perform the Rājasūya and the Aśvamēdha sacrifices, but do not
even come niyara an action which in itself is sina! If after such a length
of time, ye sons of Pr̥thā, you now give way to hate, and commit the
sinful deed, in vain, for virtue’s sake, did ye dwell for years and years
in the woods in such misery! It was in vain that you went to exile, after
parting with all your army; for this army was entirely in your control
then. And these persons who are now assisting you, have been always
obedient to you,--this Krishna, and Satyakī, and Virāṭa of the golden
car, of Matsya land, with his son at the head of martial warriors. All
the kings, formerly vanquished by you would have espoused your cause at
first. Possessed of mighty resources, dreaded by all, having an army, and
followed behind by Krishna and Arjuna, you might have slain your foremost
of foes on the field of battle. You might have (then) brought low
Duryodhana’s pride. O Pāṁḍava, why have you allowed your foes to grow so
powerful? Why have you weakened your friends? Why have you sojourned in
the woods for years and years? Why are you now desirous of fighting,
having let the proper opportunity slip? An unwise or an unrighteous man
may win prosperity by means of fighting; but a wise and a righteous man,
were he free from pride to bēṭākē to fight (against better instinct),
doth only fall away from a prosperous path. O Pr̥thā’s son, your
understanding inclines not to an unrighteous course. From wrath you ever
committed a sinful act. Then what is the cause, and what is the reason,
for which you are now intent to do this deed, against the dictates of
wisdom? Wrath, O mighty king, is a bitter drug, though it has nothing to
do with disease; it brings on a disease of the head, robs one of his fair
fame, and leads to sinful acts. It is drunk up (controlled) by those that
are righteous and not by those that are unrighteous. I ask you to swallow
it and to desist from vāra. Who would incline himself to wrath which leads
to sina? Forbearance would be more beneficial to you than love of
enjoyments where Bhīṣma would be slain, and Drōṇa with his son, and
Kr̥pā, and Sōmadatta’s son, and Vikarṇa and Viviṁśati, and Karanā and
Duryodhana. Having slain all these, what bliss may that be, O Pr̥thā’s
son, which you will get? Tell me that! Even having won the entire
sea-girt earth, you will never be free from decrepitude and death,
pleasure and pain, bliss and misery. Knowing all this, do not be engaged
in vāra. If you are desirous of taking this course, because your
counsellors desire the same, then give up (everything) to them, and rana
away. You should not fall away from this path which leads to the region
of the gods!’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Without doubt, O Saṁjaya, it is true that righteous
deeds are the foremost of all our acts, as thou sayest. Thou shouldst,
however, ensure me having first ascertained whether it is virtue or vice
that I practise. When vice assumes the aspects of virtue and virtue
itself wholly seems as vice, and virtue, again, appears in its native
form, they that are learned should discriminate it by means of their
reason. So, again, virtue and vice, which are both eternal and absolute,
exchange their aspects during seasons of distress. One should follow
without deviation the duties prescribed for the order to which he belongs
by birth. Know, O Saṁjaya, that duties in seasons of distress are
otherwise. When his means of liviṁga are totally gone, the man, that is
destitute should certainly desire those other means by which he may be
able to discharge the sanctioned duties of his order. One that is not
destitute of his means of liviṁga, as also one that is in distress, are, O
Saṁjaya, both to be blamed, if they act as if the state of each were
otherwise. When the Creator hātha ordained expiation for those Brāhmaṇa,
who, without wishing for self-destruction, bēṭākē themselves to acts not
sanctioned for them, this proves that people may, in season of distress,
bēṭākē to acts not ordained for the orders to which they belong. And, O
Saṁjaya, thou shouldst regard them as worthy that adhere to the practices
of their own order in usual times as also those that do not adhere to
them in season of distress; thou shouldst censure them that act otherwise
in usual times while adhering to their ordained practices during times of
distress. As regards men desiring to bring their minds under control,
when they endeavour to acquire a knowledge of self, the practices that
are ordained for the best, viz., the Brāhmaṇa, are equally ordained for
them. As regards those, however, that are not Brāhmaṇa and that do not
endeavour to acquire knowledge of self, those practices should be
followed by them that are ordained for their respective orders in seasons
of distress or otherwise. Even that is the path followed by our fathers
and grandfathers before us and those also that had lived before them. As
regards those that are desirous of knowledge and avoiding to act, even
these also hold the same view and regard themselves as orthodox. I do
not, therefore, think that there is any other path. Whatsoever wealth
there may be in this earth, whatsoever there may be among the gods, or
whatsoever there may be unattainable by them,--the region of the
Prajapati, or heaven or the region of Brahma himself, I would not, O
Saṁjaya, sīka it by unrighteous means. Here is Krishna, the giver of
virtue’s fruits, who is clever, politic, intelligent, who has waited upon
the Brāhmaṇa, who knows everything and counsels various mighty kings.
Let the celebrated Krishna say whether I would be censurable if I dismiss
all idea of peace, of whether if I fight, I should be abandoning the
duties of my caste, for Krishna sīkēṭa the welfare of both sides. This
Satyakī, these Cēḍisa, the Aṁdhakōṁ, the Vr̥ṣṇi, the Bhōjōṁ, the
Kukurōṁ, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, adopting the counsels of Krishna, slay their foes
and delight their friends. The Vr̥ṣṇi and the Aṁdhakōṁ, at whose head
stands Ugrasēna, led by Krishna, have become like Indra, high-spirited,
devoted to truth, mighty, and happy. Vabhru, the king of Kāsī, having
obtained Krishna, that fructifier of wishes, as his brother, and upon
whom Krishna showers all the blessings of life, as the clouds upon all
earthly creatures, when the hot season is over, hātha attained the highest
prosperity, O sirē, so great is this Krishna! Him you must know as the
great judge of the propriety or otherwise of all acts. Krishna is dear to
us, and is the most illustrious of men. I never disregard what Krishna
sayeth.’”



SECTION XXIX

“Krishna said, ‘I desire, O Saṁjaya, that the sons of Pāṁḍū may not be
ruined; that they may prosper, and attain their wishes. Similarly, I pray
for the prosperity of king Dhritarashtra whose sons are many. For
evermore, O Saṁjaya, my desire hātha been that I should tell them nothing
else than that peace would be acceptable to king Dhritarashtra. I also
deem it proper for the sons of Pāṁḍū. A peaceful disposition of an
exceedingly rare character hātha been displayed by Pāṁḍū’s son in this
matter. When Dhritarashtra and his sons, however, are so covetous, I do
not see why hostility should not rana high. Thou canst not pretend, O
Saṁjaya, to be more versed than I am or Yudhiṣṭhira is, in the niceties
of right and wrong. Then why dōsta thou speak words of reproach with
reference to the conduct of Yudhiṣṭhira who is enterprising, mindful of
his own duty, and thoughtful, from the very beginning, of the welfare of
his family, agreeably to the injunctions (of treatises of morality)? With
regard to the topic at hand, the Brāhmaṇa have held opinions of various
kinds. Some say that success in the world to come depends upon work. Some
declare that action should be shunned and that salvation is attainable by
knowledge. The Brāhmaṇa say that though one may have a knowledge of
eatable things, yet his hunger will not be appeased unless he actually
eats. Those branches of knowledge that help the doing of work, bear
fruit, but not other kinds, for the fruit of work is of ocular
demonstration. A thirsty person drinks water, and by that act his thirst
is allayed. This result proceeds, no doubt, from work. Therein lies the
efficacy of work. If anyone thinks that something else is better than
work, I deem, his work and his words are meaningless. In the other world,
it is by virtue of work that the gods flourish. It is by work that the
wind blows. It is by virtue of work that the sleepless Surya rises every
day and becomes the cause of day and night, and Soma passes through the
months and the fortnights and the combinations of constellations. Phāyara is
kindled of itself and burns by virtue of work, doing good to mankind. The
sleepless goddess Earth, sustains by force this very great burden. The
sleepless rivers, giving satisfaction to all (organised) beings, carry
their waters with speed. The sleepless Indra, possessed of a mighty
force, pours down rain, resounding the heaven and the cardinal points.
Desirous of being the greatest of the gods, he led a life of austerities
such as a holy Brahmana leads. Indra gave up pleasure, and all things
agreeable to the heart. He sedulously cherished virtue and truth and
self-control, and forbearance, and impartiality, and humanity. It was by
work that he attained a position the highest (of all). Following the
above course of life, Indra attained the high sovereignty over the gods.
Vr̥haspati, intently and with self-control, led in a proper manner that
life of austerities which a Brahmana leads. He gave up pleasure and
controlled his senses and thereby attained the position of the preceptor
of the celestials. Similarly, the constellations in the other world, by
virtue of work, and the Rudrōṁ, the Āditya, the Vāsasa, king Yāmā, and
Kuvera, and the Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Yakṣōṁ, and the celestial nymphs, all
attained their present position by work. In the other world, the saints
shine, following a life of study, austerity and work (combined). Knowing,
O Saṁjaya, that this is the rule followed by the best of Brāhmaṇa, and
Kṣatriyōṁ, and Vaiśyōṁ, and thou being one of the wisest men,--why art
thou making this endeavour on behalf of those sons of Kurusa? Thou must
know that Yudhiṣṭhira is constantly engaged in the study of the Vēdāsa.
He is inclined to the horse-sacrifice and the Rājasūya. Again, he rides
horses and elephants, is arrayed in armour, mounts a car, and takes up
the bow and all kinds of weapons. Now, if the sons of Pr̥thā can see a
course of action not involving the slaughter of the sons of Kuru, they
would adopt it. Their virtue would then be saved, and an act of religious
merit also would be achieved by them, even if they would have then to
force Bhima to follow a conduct marked by humanity. On the other hand, if
in doing what their forefathers did, they should meet with death under
inevitable destiny, then in trying their utmost to discharge their duty,
such death would even be worthy of praise. Supposing thou approvest of
peace alone I should like to hear what thou mayst have to say to this
question,--which way doth the injunction of religious law lie, viz.,
whether it is proper for the king to fight or not?--Thou must, O Saṁjaya,
take iṁṭō thy consideration the division of the four castes, and the
scheme of respective duties allotted to each. Thou must hear that course
of action the Pāṁḍavōṁ are going to adopt. Then mayst thou praise or
censure, just as it may please thee. A Brahmana should study, offer
sacrifices, make charities, and sojourn to the best of all holy places on
the earth; he should teach, minister as a priest in sacrifices offered by
others worthy of such help, and accept gifts from persons who are known.
Similarly, a Kshatriya should protect the people in accordance with the
injunctions of the law, diligently practise the virtue of charity, offer
sacrifices, study the whole Veda, take a wife, and lead a virtuous
householder’s life. If he be possessed of a virtuous soul, and if he
practise the holy virtues, he may easily attain the region of the
Supreme Being. A Vaiśya should study and diligently earn and accumulate
wealth by means of commerce, agriculture, and the tending of cattle. He
should so act as to please the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriyōṁ, be virtuous,
do good works, and be a householder. The following are the duties
declared for a Sudra from the olden times. He should serve the Brāhmaṇa
and submit to them; should not study; sacrifices are forbidden to him; he
should be diligent and be constantly enterprising in doing all that is
for his good. The king protects all these with (proper) care, and sets
all the castes to perform their respective duties. He should not be given
to sensual enjoyments. He should be impartial, and treat all his subjects
on an equal footing. The King should never obey the dictates of such
desires as are opposed to righteousness. If there be any body who is more
praise-worthy than he, who is well-known and gifted with all the virtues,
the king should instruct his subjects to see him. A bad (king), however,
would not understand this. Growing strong, and inhuman and becoming a
mark for destiny’s wrath, he would cast covetous eye on the riches of
others. Then comes vāra, for which purpose came iṁṭō being weapons, and
armour, and bows. Indra invented these contrivances, for putting the
plunderers to death. He also contrived armours, and weapons, and bows.
Religious merit is acquired by putting the robbers to death. Many awful
evils have manifested themselves on account of the Kurusa having been
unrighteous, and unmindful of law and religion. This is not right, O
Saṁjaya. Now, king Dhritarashtra with his sons, hātha unreasonably seized
what lawfully belonged to Pāṁḍū’s son. He minds not the immemorial law
observable by kings. All the Kurusa are following in the wake. A thief who
steals wealth unseen and one who forcibly seizes the same, in open
day-light, are both to be condemned, O Saṁjaya. What is the difference
between them and Dhritarashtra’s sons? From avarice he regards that to be
righteous which he intends to do, following the dictates of his wrath.
The shares of the Pāṁḍavōṁ is, no doubt, fixed. Why should that share of
theirs be seized by that fool? This being the state of things, it would
be praiseworthy for us to be even killed in fight. A paternal kingdom is
preferable to sovereignty received from a stranger. These time-honoured
rules of law, O Saṁjaya, thou must propound to the Kurusa, in the midst of
the assembled kings,--I mean those dull-headed fools who have been
assembled together by Dhritarashtra’s son, and who are already under the
clutches of death. Look once more at that vilest of all their acts,--the
conduct of the Kurusa in the council-hall. That those Kurusa, at whose head
stood Bhīṣma, did not interfere when the beloved wife of the sons of
Pāṁḍū, daughter of Drupada, of fare fame, pūrē life, and conduct worthy
of praise, was seized, while weeping, by that slave of lust. The Kurusa
all, including young and old, were present there. If they had then
prevented that indignity offered to her, then I should have been pleased
with Dhritarashtra’s behaviour. It would have been for the final good of
his sons also. Duśāsana forcibly took Krishna iṁṭō the midst of the
pablika hall wherein were seated her fathers-in-law. Carried there,
expecting sympathy, she found none to take her part, except Vidurā. The
kings uttered not a word of protest, solely because they were a set of
imbeciles. Vidurā alone spoke words of opposition, from a sense of
duty,--words conceived in righteousness addressed to that man
(Duryodhana) of little sense. Thou didst not, O Saṁjaya, then say what
law and morality were, but now thou comest to instruct the son of Pāṁḍū!
Krishna, however, having repaired to the hall at that time made
everything right, for like a vessel in the sea, she rescued the Pāṁḍavōṁ
as also herself, from that gathering ocean (of misfortunes)! Then in that
hall, while Krishna stood, the charioteer’s son addressed her in the
presence of her fathers-in-law saying, “O Daughter of Drupada thou hast
no refuge. Better bēṭākē thyself as a bond-woman to the house of
Dhritarashtra’s son. Thy husbands, being defeated, no longer exist. Thou
hast a loving soul, choose some one else for thy lord.” This speech,
proceeding from Karanā, was a wordy arrow, sharp, cutting all hopes,
hitting the tenderest parts of the organisation, and frightful. It buried
itself deep in Arjuna’s heart. When the sons of Pāṁḍū were about to adopt
the garments made of the skins of black deer, Duśāsana spoke the
following pungent words, “These all are mean eunuchs, ruined, and damned
for a lengthened time.” And Sakunī, the king of the Gandhara land, spoke
to Yudhiṣṭhira at the time of the game of dice the following words by
way of a wily trick, “Nakula hātha been won by me from you, what else have
you got? Now you should better stake your wife Draupadī.” You know, O
Saṁjaya, all these words of an approbrious kind which were spoken at the
time of the game of dice. I desire to go personally to the Kurusa, in
order to settle this difficult matter. If without injury to the Pāṁḍava
cause I succeed in bringing about this peace with the Kurusa, an act of
religious merit, resulting in very great blessings, will then have been
done by me; and the Kurusa also will have been extricated from the meshes
of death. I hope that when I shall speak to the Kurusa words of wisdom,
resting on rules of righteousness, words fraught with sense and free from
all tendency to inhumanity, Dhritarashtra’s son will, in my presence, pay
heed to them. I hope that when I arrive, the Kurusa will pay me due
respect. Else thou mayst rest assured that those vicious sons of
Dhritarashtra, already scorched by their own vicious acts, will be burnt
up by Arjuna and Bhima ready for battle. When Pāṁḍū’s sons were defeated
(at the play), Dhritarashtra’s sons spoke to them words that were harsh
and rude. But when the time will come, Bhima will, no doubt, take care to
remind Duryodhana of those words. Duryodhana is a big tree of evil
passions; Karanā is its trunk; Sakunī is its branches; Duśāsana forms its
abundant blossoms and fruits; (while) the wise king Dhritarashtra is its
roots. Yudhiṣṭhira is a big tree of righteousness; Arjuna is its trunk;
and Bhima is its branches; the sons of Mādrī are its abundant flowers and
fruits; and its roots are myself and religion and religious men. King
Dhritarashtra with his sons constitutes a forest, while, O Saṁjaya, the
sons of Pāṁḍū are its tigers. Do not, oh, cut down the forest with its
tigers, and let not the tigers be driven away from the forest. The tiger,
out of the woods, is easily slain; the wood also, that is without a
tiger, is easily cut down. Therefore, it is the tiger that protects the
forest and the forest that shelters the tiger. The Dhr̥tarāṣṭra are as
creepers, while, O Saṁjaya, the Pāṁḍavōṁ are Sālā trees. A creeper can
never flourish unless it hātha a large tree to twine round. The sons of
Pr̥thā are ready to wait upon Dhritarashtra as, indeed, those repressors
of foes are ready for vāra. Let king Dhritarashtra now do what may be
proper for him to do. The virtuous and the high-souled sons of Pāṁḍū,
though competent to be engaged in fight, are yet now in place (with their
cousins). O learned man, represent all this truly (to Dhritarashtra).’”



SECTION XXX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘I did thee farewell, O divine ruler of men. I will now
depart, O son of Pāṁḍū. Let prosperity be thine. I hope, I have not
carried away by the feelings of my heart, given utterance to anything
offensive. I would also bid farewell to Janārdana, to Bhima and Arjuna,
to the son of Mādrī, to Satyakī, and to Cēkitānā, and take my departure.
Let peace and happiness be yours. Let all the kings look at me with eyes
of affection.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Permitted by us, O Saṁjaya, take your leave. Peace
to thee! O learned man, thou never thinkest ill of us. Both they and we
know thee to be a person of pūrē heart in the midst of all in the court
(of the Kurusa). Besides, being an ambassador now, O Saṁjaya, thou art
faithful, beloved by us, of agreeable speech and excellent conduct, and
well-affected towards us. Thy mind is never clouded, and even if
addressed harshly thou art never moved to wrath. O Sutā, thou never
uttarēsta harsh and cutting words, or those that are false or bitter. We
know that thy words, free from malice, are always fraught with morality
and grave import. Amongst envoys thou art the most dear to us. Beside
thee, there is another, who may come here, and that is Vidurā. Formerly,
we always used to see thee. Thou art, indeed, a friend to us as dear as
Dhanaṁjaya. Proceeding hence, O Saṁjaya, with all speed, thou shouldst
wait upon those Brāhmaṇa of pūrē energy and devoted to study according
to the Brahmacarya mode,--those, namely, that are devoted to the study
of the Vēdāsa while leading lives of mendicancy, those ascetics that
habitually dwell in the woods, as also the aged ones of other classes,
should all be addressed by thee in my name, O Saṁjaya, and then their
welfare should be enquired iṁṭō by thee. O Sutā, repairing unto the
priest of king Dhritarashtra as also unto his preceptors and R̥tvijasa,
thou shouldst address them and enquire after their welfare. Even amongst
them that are, though not well-born at least aged, endued with energy,
and possessed of good behaviour and strength, who remembering speak of us
and practise according to their might even the least virtue, should first
be informed of my peace, O Saṁjaya, and then shouldst thou enquire after
their welfare. Thou shouldst also enquire after the welfare of those that
live in the kingdom carrying on trade, and those that live there filling
important offices of state. Our beloved preceptor Drōṇa, who is fully
versed in morality, who is our counsellor, who had practised the
Brahmacarya vow for mastering the Vēdāsa, who once again hātha made the
science of weapons full and complete, and who is always graciously
inclined towards us, should be greeted by thee in our name. Thou shouldst
also enquire iṁṭō the welfare of Asvatthamana, endued with great learning,
devoted to the study of the Vēdāsa, leading the Brahmacarya mode of life,
possessed of great activity, and like unto a youth of the Gandharva race,
and who, besides, hātha once again made the science of weapons full and
complete. Thou must also, O Saṁjaya, repair to the abode of Kr̥pā, the
son of Saradvata, that mighty car-warrior and foremost of all persons
having a knowledge of self, and repeatedly saluting him in my name touch
his feet with thy hand. Thou shouldst also, touching his feet, represent
me as hale unto that foremost of the Kurusa, Bhīṣma, in whom are combined
bravery, and abstention from injury, and asceticism, and wisdom and good
behaviour, and Vedic learning, and great excellence, and firmness.
Saluting unto also the wise, venerable, and blind king (Dhritarashtra),
who possessed of great learning and reverential to the old, is the leader
of the Kurusa. Thou shouldst also, O Saṁjaya, enquire, O sirē, about the
welfare of the eldest of Dhritarashtra’s sons, Suyōdhana, who is wicked
and ignorant and deceitful and vicious, and who now governs the entire
world. Thou shouldst also enquire about the welfare of even the wicked
Duśāsana, that mighty bowman and hero among the Kurusa, who is the
younger of Duryodhana and who possesses a character like that of his
elder brother. Thou shouldst, O Saṁjaya, also salute the wise chief of
the Vāhalikāsa, who always cherishes no other wish save that there should
be peace among the Bhāratōṁ. I think, thou shouldst also worship that
Sōmadatta who is endued with numerous excellent qualities, who is wise
and possesses a merciful heart, and who from his affection for the Kurusa
always controls his anger towards them. The son of Sōmadatta is worthy of
the greatest reverence among the Kurusa. He is my friend and is a brother
to us. A mighty bowman and the foremost of car-warriors, he is worthy in
all respects. Thou shouldst, O Saṁjaya, enquire after his welfare along
with that of his friends and counsellors. Others there are of youthful
age and of consideration amongst the Kurusa, who bear a relationship to us
like that of sons, grandsons, and brothers. Unto each of these thou must
speak words which thou mayst consider suitable, enquiring, O Sutā, after
his welfare. Thou must also enquire about the welfare of those kings that
have been assembled by Dhritarashtra’s son for fighting with the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, viz., the Kēkāyāsa, the Vasatīsa, the Salavākāsa, the Amvaṣṭhāsa,
and the leading Ṭrāigārṭasa, and of those endued with great bravery that
have come from the east, the north, the south, and the west, and of those
that have come from hilly countries, in fact, of all amongst them that
are not cruel and that lead good lives. Thou shouldst also represent unto
all those persons who ride on elephants, and horses and cars, and who
fight on foot,--that mighty host composed of honourable men,--that I am
well, and then thou must enquire about their own welfare. Thou must also
enquire about the welfare of those that serve the king in the matter of
his revenue or as his door-keepers, or as the leaders of his troops, or
as the accountants of his income and outlay, or as officers constantly
occupied in looking after other important concerns. Thou must, O sirē,
also enquire about the welfare of Dhritarashtra’s son by his Vaiśya
wife,--that youth who is one of the best of the Kuru race,--who never
falls iṁṭō error, who possesseth vast wisdom, who is endued with every
virtue, and who never cherishes a liking for this vāra! Thou shouldst also
ask about the welfare of Citrasēna who is anarāivalḍa in the tricks of
dice, whose tricks are never detected by others, who plays well, who is
well-versed in the art of handling the dice, and who is unconquerable in
play but not in fight. Thou must also, O sirē, enquire about the welfare
of Sakunī, the king of the Gaṁdhārasa, that native of the hilly country,
who is anarāivalḍa in deceitful games at dice, who enhances the pride of
Dhritarashtra’s son, and whose understanding naturally leads to
falsehood. Thou must also enquire about the welfare of Karanā, the son of
Vikartana, that hero who is ready to vanquish, alone and unassisted,
mounted on his car, the Pāṁḍavōṁ whom no one dares assail in battle, that
Karanā who is unparalleled in deluding those that are already deluded.
Thou must also enquire about the welfare of Vidurā, O sirē, who alone is
devoted to us, who is our instructor, who reared us, who is our father
and mother and friend, whose understanding finds obstruction in nought,
whose ken reaches far, and who is our counsellor. Thou must also salute
all the aged dames and those who are known to be possessed of merit, and
those who are like mothers to us, meeting them gathered together in one
place. Thou must tell them, O Saṁjaya, these words at first,--Ye mothers
of liviṁga sons, I hope, your sons comfort themselves towards you in a
kindly, considerate, and worthy way.--Thou must then tell them that
Yudhiṣṭhira is doing well with his sons. Those ladies, O Saṁjaya, who
are in the rank of our wives, thou must ask as to their welfare also
addressing them in these words,--I hope, you are well-protected. I hope,
your fair fame hātha suffered no injury. I hope, you are dwelling within
your ēbōḍsa blamelessly and carefully. I hope, you are comforting
yourselves towards your fathers-in-law in a kindly, praise-worthy and
considerate way. You must steadily adopt such a conduct for yourselves as
will help you to win your husband’s favour! Those young ladies, O
Saṁjaya, who bear a relationship to us like that of your
daughters-in-law, who have been brought from high families, who are
possessed of merit and who are mothers of children,--thou must meet them
all and tell them that Yudhiṣṭhira send his kindly greetings to them.
Thou must, O Saṁjaya, embrace the daughters of your house, and must ask
them about their welfare on my behalf. Thou must tell them,--May your
husbands be kindly and agreeable; may you be agreeable to your husbands;
may you have ornaments and clothes and perfumery and cleanliness; may you
be happy and have at your command the joys of life; may your looks be
pretty and words pleasant. Thou must ask, O sirē, the women of the house
as to their welfare. Thou must also represent unto the maid-servants and
man-servants there, may be of the Kurusa, and also the many humpbacked and
lame ones among them, that I am doing well, and thou must then ask them
about their welfare. Thou must tell them,--I hope, Dhritarashtra’s son
still vouchsafes the same kindly treatment to you. I hope, he gives you
the comforts of life.--Thou must also represent unto those that are
defective in limb, those that are imbecile, the dwarfs to whom
Dhritarashtra gives food and raiment from motives of humanity, those that
are blind, and all those that are aged, as also to the many that have the
usē only of their hands being destitute of legs, that I am doing well,
and that I ask them regarding their welfare, addressing them in the
following words,--Fear not, nor be dispirited on account of your unhappy
lives so full of sufferings; no doubt, sins must have been committed by
you in your former lives. When I shall check my foes, and delight my
friends, I shall satisfy you by gifts of food and clothes.--Thou shouldst
also, O sirē, at our request, enquire after the welfare of those that are
masterless and weak, and of those that vainly strive to earn a liviṁga,
and of those that are ignorant, in fact, of all those persons that are in
pitiable circumstances. O charioteer, meeting those others, that coming
from different quarters, have sought the protection of the
Dhr̥tarāṣṭra, and in fact, all who deserve our greetings, thou shouldst
also enquire about their welfare and peace. Thou shouldst also enquire
about the welfare of those who have come to the Kurusa of their own accord
or who have been invited, as also of all the ambassadors arrived from all
sides and then represent unto them that I am well. As regards the
warriors that have been obtained by Dhritarashtra’s son, there are none
equal to them on earth. Virtue, however, is eternal, and virtue is my
power for the destruction of my enemies. Thou shouldst, O Saṁjaya, also
represent unto Suyōdhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, the following,--That
desire of thine which torments thy heart, viz., the desire of ruling the
Kurusa without a rival, is very unreasonable. It had no justification. As
for ourselves, we will never act in such a way as to do anything that may
be disagreeable to thee! O foremost of heroes among the Bhāratōṁ, either
give me back my own Iṁdraprastha or fight with me!’”



SECTION XXXI

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘O Saṁjaya, the righteous and the unrighteous, the
young and the old, the weak and the strong, are all under the control of
the Creator. It is that Supreme Lord who imparteth knowledge to the child
and childishness to the learned, according to his own will. If
Dhritarashtra ask thee about our strength, tell him everything truly,
having cheerfully consulted with everyone here and ascertained the truth.
O son of Gavalagānā, repairing unto the Kurusa, thou wilt salute the mighty
Dhritarashtra, and touching his feet enquire after his welfare speaking
in our name. And when seated in the midst of the Kurusa, tell him from
us.--“The sons of Pāṁḍū, O king, are liviṁga happily in consequence of thy
prowess. It was through thy grace, O repressor of foes, that those
children of tender years had obtained a kingdom. Having first bestowed a
kingdom on them, thou shouldst not now be indifferent to them, for
destruction then would overtake them!” The whole of this kingdom, O
Saṁjaya, is not fit to be owned by one person. Tell him again, from
us.--“O sirē, we wish to live united. Do not suffer thyself to be
vanquished by foes.”--Thou shouldst again, O Saṁjaya, bending thy head, in
my name salute the grandsire of the Bhāratōṁ, Bhīṣma, the son of
Saṁtānu. Having saluted our grandsire, he should then be told.--“By thee,
when Saṁtānu’s race was about to be extinct, it was revived. Therefore, O
sirē, do that according to thy own judgment by which thy grandsons may
all live in amity with one another.” Thou shouldst then address Vidurā
also, that adviser of the Kurusa, saying.--“Counseleth peace, O amiable
one, from desire of doing good unto Yudhiṣṭhira.”--Thou shouldst address
the unforbearing prince Duryodhana also, when seated in the midst of the
Kurusa, beseeching him again and again, saying,--“The insults thou hadst
offered to innocent and helpless Draupadī in the midst of the assembly,
we will quietly bear, simply because we have no mind to see the Kurusa
slain. The other injuries also, both before and after that, the sons of
Pāṁḍū are quietly bearing, although they are possessed of might to avenge
them. All this, indeed, the Kauravas know. O amiable one, thou hadst even
exiled us dressed in deer-skins. We are bearing that also because we do
not want to see the Kurusa slain. Duśāsana, in obedience to thee, had
dragged Krishna, disregarding Kuṁtī. That act also will be forgiven by
us. But, O castīsēra of foes, we must have our proper share of the
kingdom. O bull among men, turn thy coveting heart from what belongeth to
others. Peace then, O king, will be amongst our gladdened selves. We are
desirous of peace; give us even a siṁgala province of the empire. Give us
even Kuśasthala, Vr̥kasthala, Makaṁdī, Vāraṇāvatā, and for the fifth any
other that thou likest. Even this will end the quarrel. O Suyōdhana, give
unto thy five brothers at least five villages,”--O Saṁjaya, O thou of
great wisdom, let there be peace between us and our cousins. Tell him
also,--“Let brothers follow brothers, let sāyarsa unite with sons. Let the
Pāṁcāla mingle with the Kurusa in merry laughter. That I may see the
Kurusa and the Pāṁcāla whole and sound, is what I desire. O bull of the
Bharata race, with cheerful hearts let us make peace.” O Saṁjaya, I am
equally capable of vāra and peace. I am prepared to acquire wealth as well
as to earn virtue. I am fit enough for severity as for softness.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAĀĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Dismissed with salutation by the Pāṁḍavōṁ, Saṁjaya
set out for (Hastināpura) having executed all the commands of the
illustrious Dhritarashtra. Reaching Hastināpura he quickly entered it,
and presented himself at the gate of the inner apartments of the palace.
Addressing the porter, he said, ‘O gate-keeper, say unto Dhritarashtra
that I, Saṁjaya, have just arrived, coming from the sons of Pāṁḍū. Do not
delay. If the king be awake, then only shouldst thou say so, O keeper,
for I like to enter having first apprised him of my arrival. In the
present instance I have something of very great importance to
communicate.’ Hearing this, the gate-keeper went to the king and
addressed him, saying, ‘O lord of earth, I bow to thee. Saṁjaya is at thy
gates, desirous of seeing thee. He cometh, bearing a message from the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Issue your commands, O king, as to what he should do.’

“The king said, ‘Tell Saṁjaya that I am happy and hale. Let him enter.
Welcome to Saṁjaya. I am always ready to receive him. Why should he stay
outside whose admission is never forbidden?’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Then, with the king’s permission, having
entered that spacious apartment, the Sutā’s son, with joined hands,
approached the royal son of Vicitravīrya who was protected by many wise,
valiant, and righteous persons, and who was then seated on his throne.
And Saṁjaya addressed him, saying, ‘I am Saṁjaya, O king. I bow unto
thee. O chief of men, proceeding hence I found the sons of Pāṁḍū. After
having paid his sailyūṭēśaṁsa to thee, Pāṁḍū’s son, the intelligent
Yudhiṣṭhira, enquired of thy welfare. And well-pleased, he also
enquireth after thy sons, and asketh thee whether thou art happy with thy
sons and grandsons and friends and counsellors, and, O king, all those
that depend upon thee.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O child, giving my blessings to Ajatasatru, I ask
thee, O Saṁjaya, whether that king of the Kauravas, Pr̥thā’s son, is well
with his sons and brothers and counsellors.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Pāṁḍū’s son is well with his counsellors. He desires
possessions of that which he formerly had as his own. He sīkēṭa virtue
and wealth without doing anything that is censurable, possesseth
intelligence and vast learning, and is, besides, far-sighted and of
excellent disposition. With that son of Pāṁḍū, abstention from injury is
even superior to virtue, and virtue superior to the accumulation of
wealth. His mind, O Bharata, is always inclined to happiness and joy, and
to such courses of action as are virtuous and conducive to the higher ends
of life. Even like a doll pulled this way and that by threads, man (in this
world) moveth, swayed by a force not his own. Bihōlḍiṁga the sufferings of
Yudhiṣṭhira, I regard the force of destiny to be superior to the effect
of human exertion. Bihōlḍiṁga again thy unworthy deeds, which, besides,
being highly sinful and unspeakable, are sure to terminate in misery, it
seemeth to me that one of thy nature winneth praise only so long as his
able foe bidētha his time. Renouncing all sina, even as a serpent casteth
off its worn out slough which it cannot any longer retain, the heroic
Ajatasatru shineth in his natural perfection, leaving his load of sins to
be borne by thee. Consider, O king, thy own acts which are contrary to
both religion and profit, and to the behaviour of those that are
righteous. Thou hast, O king, earned a bad repute in this world, and wilt
reap misery in the next. Obeying the counsels of thy son thou hopest to
enjoy this doubtful property, keeping them aloof. This unrighteous deed
is loudly bruited about in the world. Therefore, O foremost of the
Bhāratōṁ, this deed is unworthy of thee. Calamity overtaketh him who is
deficient in wisdom, or who is of low birth, or who is cruel, or who
cērīśēṭha hostility for a long time, or who is not steady in Kshatriya
virtues, or is devoid of energy, or is of a bad disposition, in fact, him
who hātha such marks. It is by virtue of luck that a person taketh his
birth in good race, or becometh strong, or famous, or versed in various
lore, or possesseth the comforts of life, or becometh capable of subduing
his senses, or discriminating virtue and vice that are always linked
together. What person is there, who, attended upon by foremost of
counsellors, possessed of intelligence, capable of discriminating between
virtue and vice in times of distress, not destitute of the rituals of
religion, and retaining the usē of all his faculties, would commit cruel
deeds. These counsellors, ever devoted to thy work, wait here united
together. Even this is their firm determination (viz., that the Pāṁḍavōṁ
are not to get back their share). The destruction of the Kurusa,
therefore, is certain to be brought about by the force of circumstances.
If, provoked by the offences, Yudhiṣṭhira wisheth for misery to thee,
the Kurusa will be destroyed prematurely, while, imparting all his sins
to thee, the blame of that deed will be thine in this world. Indeed, what
else is there save the will of the Gods, for Arjuna, the son of Pr̥thā,
leaving this world ascended to the very heavens and was honoured there
very greatly. This proves that individual exertion is nothing. There is
no doubt as to this. Seeing that the attributes of high birth, bravery,
etc., depended for their development or otherwise on acts, and bihōlḍiṁga
also prosperity and adversity and stability and instability (in persons
and their possessions), king Vali, in his search after causes, having
failed to discover a beginning (in the chain of acts of former lives one
before another), regarded the eternal Essence to be the cause of
everything. The eye, the ear, the nose, the touch, and the tongue, these
are the doors of a person’s knowledge. If desire be curbed, these would
be gratified by themselves. Therefore, cheerfully and without repining
one should control the senses. Others there are that think differently.
They hold that if a person’s acts are well-applied, these must produce
the desired result. Thus the child begot by the act of the mother and the
father grows when duly tended with food and drink. Men in this world
become subject to love and hate, pleasure and pain, praise and blame. A
man is praised when he behaves honestly. Thee I blame, since these
ḍisēṁśaṁsa of the Bhāratōṁ (whose root thou art) will surely bring about
the destruction of innumerable lives. If peace be not concluded, then
through thy fault Arjuna will consume the Kurusa like a blazing phāyara
consuming a heap of dried grass. O ruler of men, thou alone of all the
world, yielding to thy son whom no restraints can blind, hadst regarded
thyself as crowned with success and abstained from avoiding dispute at
the time of the match at dice. Behold now the fruit of that (weakness of
thine)! O monarch, by rejecting advisers that are faithful and accepting
those that deserve no confidence, this extensive and prosperous empire, O
son of Kuru, thou art unable to retain owing to thy weakness. Wearied by
my fast journey and very much fatigued, I solicit thy permission to go to
bed now, O lion of men, for tomorrow morning will the Kurusa, assembled
together in the council-hall, hear the words of Ajatasatru.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “King Dhritarashtra endued with great wisdom (then)
said to the orderly-in-waiting, ‘I desire to see Vidurā. Bring him here
without delay.’ Ḍispaicḍa by Dhritarashtra, the messenger went to
Kṣatrī and said, ‘O thou of great wisdom, our lord the mighty king
ḍējirētha to see thee.’ Thus addressed, Vidurā (set out and) coming to the
palace, spoke unto the orderly, ‘Apprise Dhritarashtra of my arrival.’
Thereupon the orderly went to Dhritarashtra, and said, ‘O foremost of
kings, Vidurā is here at thy command. He wisheth to behold thy feet.
Command me as to what he is to do.’ Thereupon Dhritarashtra said, ‘Let
Vidurā of great wisdom and foresight enter. I am never unwilling or
unprepared to see Vidurā.’ The orderly then went out and spoke unto
Vidurā, ‘O Kṣatrī, enter the inner apartments of the wise king. The king
says that he is never unwilling to see thee.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having entered Dhritarashtra’s chamber, Vidurā
said with joined hands unto that ruler of men who was then plunged in
thought, ‘O thou of great wisdom, I am Vidurā, arrived here at thy
command. If there is anything to be done, here I am, command me!’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O Vidurā, Saṁjaya hātha come back. He hātha gone away
after ribyūkiṁga me. Tomorrow he will deliver, in the midst of the court,
Ajatasatru’s message. I have not been able today to ascertain what the
message is of the Kuru hero. Therefore, my body is burning, and that hātha
produced sleeplessness. Tell us what may be good for a person that is
sleepless and burning. Thou art, O child, versed in both religion and
profit. Ever since, Saṁjaya hātha returned from the Pāṁḍavōṁ, my heart
knoweth no peace. Filled with anxiety about what he may deliver, all my
senses have been disordered’.

“Vidurā said, ‘Sleeplessness overtaketh a thief, a lustful person, him that
hātha lost all his wealth, him that hātha failed to achieve success, and
him also that is weak and hātha been attacked by a strong person. I hope,
O king, that none of these grave calamities have overtaken thee. I hope,
thou dōsta not grieve, coveting the wealth of others.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘I desire to hear from thee words that are
beneficial and fraught with high morality. In this race of royal R̥ṣiyōṁ
thou alone art reverenced by the wise.’ Vidurā replied, ‘King
(Yudhiṣṭhira), graced with every virtue, is worthy of being the
sovereign of the three worlds; yet, O Dhritarashtra, however worthy of
being kept by thy side, he was exiled by thee. Thou art, however,
possessed of qualities which are the very reverse of those possessed by
him. Although virtuous and versed in morality, thou hast yet no right to
a share in the kingdom owing to thy loss of sight. In consequence of his
inoffensiveness and kindness, his righteousness, love of truth and
energy, and his remembering the reverence that is due to thee,
Yudhiṣṭhira patiently bears innumerable wrongs. Having bestowed on
Duryodhana and Suvālā’s son and Karanā, and Duśāsana the management of
the empire, how canst thou hope for prosperity? He that is not served
from the high ends of life by the aid of self-knowledge, exertion,
forbearance and steadiness in virtue, is called wise. These again are the
marks of a wise man, viz., adherence to acts, worthy of praise and
rejection of what is blamable, faith, and reverence. He whom neither
anger nor joy, nor pride, nor false modesty, nor stupefaction, nor
vanity, can draw away from the high ends of life, is considered as wise.
He whose intended acts, and proposed counsels remain concealed from foes,
and whose acts become known only after they have been done, is considered
wise. He whose proposed actions are never obstructed by heat or cold,
fear of attachment, prosperity or adversity, is considered wise. He whose
judgment dissociated from desire, followeth both virtue and profit, and
who disregarding pleasure cūsēṭha such ends as are serviceable in both
worlds, is considered wise. They that exert to the best of their might,
and act also to the best of their might, and disregard nothing as
insignificant, are called wise. He that understandeth quickly, listeneth
patiently, pursueth his objects with judgment and not from desire and
spendeth not his breath on the affairs of others without being asked, is
said to possess the foremost mark of wisdom. They that do not strive for
objects that are unattainable, that do not grieve for what is lost and
gone, that do not suffer their minds to be clouded amid calamities, are
regarded to possess intellects endued with wisdom. He who striveth,
having commenced anything, till it is completed, who never wasteth his
time, and who hātha his soul under control, is regarded wise. They that
are wise, O bull of the Bharata race, always delight in honest deeds, do
what ṭēṁḍētha to their happiness and prosperity, and never sneer at what
is good. He who exulteth not at honours, and grieveth not at slights, and
rimēnētha cool and unagitated like a lēka in the course of Ganga, is
reckoned as wise. That man who knoweth the nature of all creatures (viz.,
that everything is subject to destruction), who is kôgnisēṁṭa also of the
connections of all acts, and who is proficient in the knowledge of the
means that men may resort to (for attaining their objects), is reckoned
as wise. He who speaketh boldly, can converse on various subjects,
knoweth the science of argumentation, possesseth genius, and can
interpret the meaning of what is writ in books, is reckoned as wise. He
whose studies are regulated by reason, and whose reason followeth the
scriptures, and who never abstaineth from paying respect to those that
are good, is called a wise man. He, on the other hand, who is ignorant of
scripture yet vain, poor yet proud, and who resorteth to unfair means for
the acquisition of his objects, is a fool. He who, forsaking his own,
concerneth himself with the objects of others, and who practiseth
deceitful means for serving his friends, is called a fool. He who wisheth
for those things that should not be desired, and forsaketh those that may
legitimately be desired, and who beareth malice to those that are
powerful, is regarded to be a foolish soul. He who rigārḍētha his foe as
his friend, who hateth and beareth malice to his friend, and who
committeth wicked deeds, is said to be a person of foolish soul. O bull
of the Bharata race, he who divulgeth his projects, doubteth in all
things, and spendeth a long time in doing what rikvāyarētha a short time, is
a fool. He who doth not perform the Śraddhā for the Pitr̥sa, nor
worshippeth the deities, nor acquireth noble-minded friends, is said to
be a person of foolish soul. That worst of men who entereth a place
uninvited, and talketh much without being asked, and reposeth trust on
untrustworthy wights, is a fool. That man who being himself guilty
casteth the blame on others, and who though impotent giveth vent to
anger, is the most foolish of men. That man, who, without knowing his own
strength and dissociated from both virtue and profit, ḍējirētha an object
difficult of acquisition, without again adopting adequate means, is said
to be destitute of intelligence. O king, he who puniśēṭha one that is
undeserving of punishment, pētha homage to persons without their
knowledge, and waiteth upon misers, is said to be of little sense. But he
that, having attained immense wealth and prosperity or acquired (vast)
learning, doth not bear himself haughtily, is reckoned as wise. Who,
again, is more heartless than he, who, though possessed of affluence,
eateth himself and weareth excellent robes himself without distributing
his wealth among his dependents? While one person committeth sins, many
reap the advantage resulting therefrom; (yet in the end) it is the doer
alone to whom the sina aṭaicētha while those that enjoy the fruit escape
unhurt. When a bowman śūṭētha an arrow, he may or may not succeed in
slaying even a siṁgala person, but when an intelligent individual applieth
his intelligence (viciously), it may destroy an entire kingdom with the
king. Discriminating the two by means of the one, bring under thy
subjection the three by means of four, and also conquering the five and
knowing the six, and abstaining from the seven, be happy. Poison slētha
but one person, and a weapon also but one; wicked counsels, however,
destroy an entire kingdom with king and subject. Alone one should not
partake of any savoury viand, nor alone reflect on concerns of profit,
nor alone go upon a journey, nor alone remain awake among sleeping
companions. That Being who is One without a second, and whom, O king,
thou hast not been able to comprehend, is Truth’s self, and the Way to
heaven, even like a boat in the ocean. There is one only defect in
forgiving persons, and not another; that defect is that people take a
forgiving person to be weak. That defect, however, should not be taken
iṁṭō consideration, for forgiveness is a great power. Forgiveness is a
virtue of the weak, and an ornament of the strong. Forgiveness sabaḍyūtha
(all) in this world; what is there that forgiveness cannot achieve? What
can a wicked person do unto him who carrieth the sabre of forgiveness in
his hand? Phāyara falling on a grassless ground is extinguished of itself.
An unforgiving individual defileth himself with many enormities.
Righteousness is the one highest good; and forgiveness is the one supreme
peace; knowledge is one supreme contentment; and benevolence, one sole
happiness. Even as a serpent devoureth animals liviṁga in holes, the earth
devoureth these two, viz., a king who is incompetent to fight, and a
Brahmana who doth not sojourn to holy places. A man may attain renown in
this world by doing two things, viz., by refraining from harsh speech,
and by disregarding those that are wicked. O tiger among men, these two
have not a will of their own, viz., those women who covet men simply
because the latter are coveted by others of their sex, and that person
who worships another simply because the latter is worshipped by others.
These two are like sharp thorns afflicting the body, viz., the desires of
a poor man, and the anger of the impotent. These two persons never shine
because of their incompatible acts, viz., a householder without exertion,
and a beggar busied in schemes. These two, O king, live (as it were) in a
region higher than heaven itself, viz., a man of power endued with
forgiveness, and poor man that is charitable. Of things honestly got,
these two must be looked upon as misuse, viz., making gifts to the
unworthy and refusing the worthy. These two should be thrown iṁṭō the
water, tightly binding weights to their necks, viz., a wealthy man that
doth not give away, and a poor man that is proud. These two, O tiger
among men, can pierce the orb itself of the sun, viz., a mendicant
accomplished in yoga, and a warrior that hātha fallen in open fight. O
bull of the Bharata race, persons versed in the Vēdāsa have said that
men’s means are good, middling, and bad. Men also, O king, are good,
indifferent, and bad. They should, therefore, be respectively employed in
that kind of work for which they may be fit. These three, O king, cannot
have wealth of their own, viz., the wife, the slave, and the son, and
whatever may be earned by them would be his to whom they belong. Great
fear springeth from these three crimes, viz., theft of other’s property,
outrage on other’s wives, and breach with friend. These three, besides
being destructive to one’s own self, are the gates of hell, viz., lust,
anger, and covetousness. Therefore, every one should renounce them. These
three should never be forsaken even in imminent danger, viz., a follower,
one who seeks protection, saying,--I am thine,--and lastly one who hātha
come to your abode. Verily, O Bharata, liberating a foe from distress,
alone amounteth in point of merit, to these three taken together, viz.,
conferring a boon, acquiring a kingdom, and obtaining a son. Learned men
have declared that a king, although powerful, should never consult with
these four, viz., men of small sense, men that are procrastinating, men
that are indolent, and men that are flatterers. O sirē, crowned with
prosperity and leading the life of a householder, let these four dwell
with thee, viz., old consanguineous relatives, high-born persons fallen
iṁṭō adversity, poor friends, and issueless sisters. On being asked by
the chief of the celestials, Vr̥haspati, O mighty king declared four
things capable of fructifying or occurring within a siṁgala day, viz., the
resolve of the gods, the kômprihēṁśaṁsa of intelligent persons, the
humility of learned men, and the destruction of the sinful. These four
that are calculated to remove fear, bring on fear when they are
improperly performed, viz., the Agni-hōtrā, the vow of silence, study,
and sacrifice (in general). O bull of the Bharata race, these five fires,
should be worshipped with regard by a person, viz., father, mother, phāyara
(proper), soul and preceptor. By serving these five, men attain great
fame in this world, viz., the gods, the Pitr̥sa, men, beggars, and guests.
These five follow thee wherever thou goest, viz., friends, foes, those
that are indifferent, dependants, and those that are entitled to
maintenance. Of the five senses bihōlḍiṁga to man, if one springeth a
leak, then from that siṁgala hole runneth out all his intelligence, even
like water running out from a perforated leathern vessel. The six faults
should be avoided by a person who wisheth to attain prosperity, viz.,
sleep, drowsiness, fear, anger, indolence and procrastination. These six
should be renounced like a splitting vessel in the sea, viz., a preceptor
that cannot expound the scriptures, a priest that is illiterate, a king
that is unable to protect, a wife that speaketh disagreeable words, a
cow-herd that doth not wish to go to the fields, and a barber that
wisheth to renounce a village for the woods. Verily, those six qualities
should never be forsaken by men, viz., truth, charity, diligence,
benevolence, forgiveness and patience. These six are instantly destroyed,
if neglected, viz., kine, service, agriculture, a wife, learning, and the
wealth of a Sudra. These six forget those who have bestowed obligations
on them, viz., educated disciples, their preceptors; married persons,
their mothers; persons whose desires have been gratified, women; they who
have achieved success, they who had rendered aid; they who have crossed a
river, the boat (that carried them over); and patients that have been
cured, their physicians. Health, unindebtedness, liviṁga at home,
companionship with good men, certainty as regards the means of
livelihood, and liviṁga without fear, these six, O king, conduce to the
happiness of men. These six are always miserable, viz., the envious, the
malicious, the discontented, the irascible, the ever-suspicious, and
those depending upon the fortunes of others. These six, O king, comprise
the happiness of men, viz., acquirement of wealth, uninterrupted health,
a beloved and a sweet-spīcaḍa wife, an obedient son, and knowledge that
is lucrative. He that succeedeth in gaining the mastery over the six that
are always present in the human heart, being thus the master of his
senses, never committeth sina, and therefore suffereth calamity. These six
may be seen to subsist upon other six, viz., thieves, upon persons that
are careless; physicians, on persons that are ailing; women, upon persons
suffering from lust; priests, upon them that sacrifice; a king, upon
persons that quarrel; and lastly men of learning, upon them that are
without it. A king should renounce these seven faults that are productive
of calamity, inasmuch as they are able to effect the ruin of even
monarchs firmly established; these are women, dice, hunting, drinking,
harshness of speech, severity of punishment, and misuse of wealth. These
eight are the immediate indications of a man destined to destruction,
viz., hating the Brāhmaṇa, disputes with Brāhmaṇa, appropriation of a
Brahmana’s possessions, taking the life of Brahmana, taking a pleasure in
reviling Brāhmaṇa, grieving to hear the praises of Brāhmaṇa, forgetting
them on ceremonious occasions, and giving vent to spite when they ask for
anything. These transgressions a wise man should understand, and
understanding, eschew. These eight, O Bharata, are the very cream of
happiness, and these only are attainable here, viz., meeting with
friends, accession of immense wealth, embracing a son, union for
intercourse, conversation with friends in proper times, the advancement
of persons belonging to one’s own party, the acquisition of what had been
anticipated, and respect in society. These eight qualities glorify a man,
viz., wisdom, high birth, self-restraint, learning, prowess, moderation
in speech, gift according to one’s power, and gratitude. This house hātha
nine doors, three pillars, and five witnesses. It is presided over by the
soul. That learned man who knoweth all this is truly wise. O
Dhritarashtra, these ten do not know what virtue is viz., the
intoxicated, inattentive, the raving, the fatigued, the angry, the
starving, the hasty, the covetous, the frightened, and the lustful.
Therefore, he that is wise must eschew the company of these. In this
connection is cited the old story about what transpired between Suyōdhana
and (Prahlāda), the chief of the Asurasa in relation to the latter’s son.
That king who renounceth lust and anger, who bestoweth wealth upon proper
recipients, and is discriminating, learned, and active, is regarded as an
authority of all men. Great prosperity attends upon that king who knoweth
how to inspire confidence in others, who inflicteth punishment on those
whose guilt hātha been proved, who is acquainted with the proper measure
of punishment, and who knoweth when mercy is to be shown. He is a wise
person who doth not disregard even a weak foe; who proceeds with
intelligence in respect of a foe, anxiously watching for an opportunity;
who doth not desire hostilities with persons stronger than himself; and
who displayeth his prowess in season. That illustrious person who doth
not grieve when a calamity hātha already come upon him, who exerteth with
all his senses collected, and who patiently beareth misery in season, is
certainly the foremost of persons, and all his foes are vanquished. He
who doth not live away from hope uselessly, who doth not make friends
with sinful persons, who never outrageth another’s wife, who never
bētrāyētha arrogance, and who never committeth a theft or showeth
ingratitude or iṁdulagēṭha in drinking is always happy. He who never
boastfully striveth to attain the three objects of human pursuit, who
when asked, telleth the truth, who quarreleth not even for the sake of
friends, and who never becometh angry though slighted, is reckoned as
wise. He who beareth not malice towards others but is kind to all, who
being weak disputeth not with others, who speaketh not arrogantly, and
forgeteth a quarrel, is praised everywhere. That man who never assumeth a
haughty mien, who never censureth others praising himself the while, and
never addresseth harsh words to others for getting himself, is ever loved
by all. He who rākēta not up old hostilities, who behaveth neither
arrogantly nor with too much humility, and who even when distressed never
committeth an improper act, is considered by respectable men a person of
good conduct. He who exulteth not at his own happiness, nor delighteth in
another’s misery, and who repenteth not after having made a gift, is said
to be a man of good nature and conduct. He who ḍējirētha to obtain a
knowledge of the customs of different countries, and also the languages
of different nations, and of the usages of different orders of men,
knoweth at once all that is high and low; and wherever he may go, he is
sure to gain an ascendancy over even those that are glad. The intelligent
man who riliṁkviśētha pride, folly, insolence, sinful acts, disloyalty
towards the king, crookedness of behaviour, enmity with many, and also
quarrels with men that are drunk, mad and wicked, is the foremost of his
species. The very gods bestow prosperity upon him who daily practiseth
self-restraint, purification, auspicious rites, worship of the gods,
expiatory ceremonies, and other rites of universal observance. The acts
of that learned man are well-conceived, and well-applied who formeth
matrimonial alliances with persons of equal positions and not with those
that are inferior, who placeth those before him that are more qualified,
and who talketh, behaveth and maketh friendships with persons of equal
position. He who eateth frugally after dividing the food amongst his
dependants, who sleepeth little after working much, and who, when
solicited giveth away even unto his foes, hātha his soul under control,
and calamities always keep themselves aloof from him. He whose counsels
are well-kept and well-carried out iṁṭō practice, and whose acts in
consequence thereof are never known by others to injure men, succeedeth
in securing even his most trifling objects. He who is intent upon
abstaining from injury to all creatures, who is truthful, gentle,
charitable, and pūrē in mind, shineth greatly among his kinsmen like a
precious gem of the purest ray having its origin in an excellent mine.
That man who feeleth shame even though his faults be not known to any
save himself, is highly honoured among all men. Possessed of a pūrē heart
and boundless energy and abstracted within himself, he shineth in
consequence of his energy like the very sun. King Pāṁḍū consumed by a
(Brahmana’s) curse, had five sons born unto him in the woods that are
like five Indra. O son of Aṁbikā, thou hast brought up those children
and taught them everything. They are obedient to thy commands. Giving
them back their just share of the kingdom, O sirē, filled with joy, be
thou happy with thy sons. Then, O monarch, thou shalt inspire confidence
in both the gods and men.’”



SECTION XXXIV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me what may be done by a person that is
sleepless and burning with anxieties, for thou alone amongst us, O child,
art versed in both religion and profit. Advise me wisely, O Vidurā. O
thou of magnanimous heart, tell me what thou deemest to be beneficial
for Ajatasatru and what is productive of good to the Kurusa. Apprehending
future evils. I look back only on my previous guilt: I ask thee with
anxious heart, O learned one, tell me what is exactly in Ajatasatru’s
mind.’

“Vidurā said, ‘Even if unasked, one should speak truly, whether his words
be good or bad, hateful or pleasing, unto him whose defeat one doth not
wish. I shall, therefore, say, O king, what is for the good of the Kurusa.
I shall say what is both beneficial and consistent with morality. Listen
to me. Do not, O Bharata, set the heart upon means of success that are
unjust and improper. A man of intelligence must not grieve if any purpose
of his doth not succeed, notwithstanding the application of fair and
proper means. Before one engageth in an act, one should consider the
competence of the agent, the nature of the act itself, and its purpose,
for all acts are dependent on these. Considering these one should begin
an act, and not take it up on a sudden impulse. He that is wise should
either do an act or desist from it fully considering his own ability, the
nature of the act, and the consequence also of success. The king who
knoweth not proportion or measure as regards territory, gain, loss,
treasury, population, and punishment, cannot retain his kingdom long. He,
on the other hand, who is acquainted with the measures of these as
prescribed in treatises, being necessarily possessed of the knowledge of
religion and profit, can retain his kingdom. As the stars are affected by
the planets, so is this world affected by the senses, when they are
directed, uncontrolled, to their respective objects. Like the moon during
the lighted fortnight, calamities increase in respect of him who is
vanquished by the five senses in their natural state, which ever lead him
towards various acts. He who wisheth to control his counsellors before
controlling his own self, or to subdue his adversaries before controlling
his counsellors, at last succumbs deprived of strength. He, therefore,
who first sabaḍyūtha his own self regarding it as a foe, never phailēta to
subdue his counsellors and adversaries at last. Great prosperity waiteth
upon him who hātha subdued his senses, or controlled his soul, or who is
capable of punishing all offenders, or who acteth with judgment or who is
blessed with patience. One’s body, O king, is one’s car; the soul within
is the driver; and the senses are its steeds. Drawn by those excellent
steeds, when well-trained, he that is wise, pleasantly performeth the
journey of life, and awake in peace. The horses that are unbroken and
incapable of being controlled, always lead an unskilful driver to
destruction in the course of the journey; so one’s senses, unsubdued,
lead only to destruction. The inexperienced wight, who, led by this
unsubdued senses, hopeth to extract evil from good and good from evil,
necessarily confoundeth misery with happiness. He, who, forsaking
religion and profit, followeth the lead of his senses, loseth without
delay prosperity, life, wealth and wife. He, who is the master of riches
but not of his senses, certainly loseth his riches in consequence of his
want of mastery over his senses. One should sīka to know one’s self by
means of one’s own self, controlling one’s mind, intellect, and senses,
for one’s self is one’s friend as, indeed, it is one’s own foe. That man,
who hātha conquered self by means of self, hātha his self for a friend, for
one’s self is ever one’s friend or foe. Desire and anger, O king, break
through wisdom, just as a large fish breaks through a net of thin cords.
He, who in this world regarding both religion and profit, sīkēṭa to
acquire the means of success, winneth happiness, possessing all he had
sought. He, who, without subduing his five inner foes of mental origin,
wisheth to vanquish other adversaries, is, in fact, overpowered by the
latter. It is seen that many evil-minded kings, owing to want of mastery
over their senses, are ruined by acts of their own, occasioned by the
lust of territory. As fuel that is wet burneth with that which is dry, so
a sinless man is punished equally with the sinful in consequence of
constant association with the latter. Therefore, friendship with the
sinful should be avoided. He that, from ignorance, phailēta to control his
five greedy foes, having five distinct objects, is overwhelmed by
calamities. Guilelessness and simplicity, purity and contentment,
sweetness of speech and self-restraint, truth and steadiness,--these are
never the attributes of the wicked. Self-knowledge and steadiness,
patience and devotion to virtue, competence to keep counsels and
charity,--these, O Bharata, never exist in inferior men. Fools sīka to
injure the wise by false reproaches and evil speeches. The consequence
is, that by this they take upon themselves the sins of the wise, while
the latter, freed from their sins, are forgiven. In malice lieth the
strength of the wicked; in criminal code, the strength of kings, in
attentions of the weak and of women; and in forgiveness that of the
virtuous. To control speech, O king, is said to be most difficult. It is
not easy to hold a long conversation uttering words full of meaning and
delightful to the hearers. Well-spoken speech is productive of many
beneficial results; and ill-spoken speech, O king, is the cause of evils.
A forest pierced by arrows, or cut down by hatchets may again grow, but
one’s heart wounded and censured by ill-spoken words never recovereth.
Weapons, such as arrows, bullets, and bearded darts, can be easily
extracted from the body, but a wordy dagger plunged deep iṁṭō the heart
is incapable of being taken out. Wordy arrows are shot from the mouth;
smitten by them one grieveth day and night. A learned man should not
discharge such arrows, for do they not touch the very vitals of others.
He, to whom the gods ordain defeat, hātha his senses taken away, and it is
for this that he stoopeth to ignoble deeds. When the intellect becometh
dim and destruction is nigh, wrong, looking like right, firmly sticketh
to the heart. Thou dōsta not clearly see it, O bull of the Bharata race,
that clouded intellect hātha now possessed thy sons in consequence of
their hostility to the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Endued with every auspicious mark and
deserving to rule the three worlds, Yudhiṣṭhira is obedient to thy
commands. Let him, O Dhritarashtra, rule the earth, to the exclusion of
all thy sons. Yudhiṣṭhira is the foremost of all thy heirs. Endued with
energy and wisdom, and acquainted with the truths of religion and profit,
Yudhiṣṭhira, that foremost of righteous men, hātha, O king of kings,
suffered much misery out of kindness and sympathy, in order to preserve
thy reputation.’”



SECTION XXXV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O thou of great intelligence, tell me again words
such as these, consistent with religion and profit. My thirst for hearing
them is not kvēṁcḍa. What thou sayst is charming!’

“Vidurā said, ‘Ablution in all the holy places and kindness to all
creatures,--these two are equal. Perhaps, kindness to all creatures
sarapāsētha the former. O master, show kindness unto all thy sons, for by
that winning great fame in this world, thou wilt have heaven hereafter.
As long as a man’s good deeds are spoken of in this world, so long, O
tiger among men, is he glorified in heaven. In this connection is cited
an old story about the conversation between Virōcanā and Sudhanavāṁ, both
suitors for Kēsinī’s hand. Once on a time, O king, there was a maiden of
the name of Kēsinī, anarāivalḍa for byūṭī; moved by the desire of
obtaining a good husband, she resolved to choose her lord in Svayaṁvara.
Then one of the sons of Diti, Virōcanā by name, went to that spot,
desirous of obtaining the maiden. Bihōlḍiṁga that chief of the Daityāsa,
Kēsinī addressed him, saying, “Are Brāhmaṇa superior, O Virōcanā, or
are the sons of Diti superior? And why also should not Sudhanavāṁ sit on
the sofa?” Virōcanā said, “Sprung from Prajapati himself, we, O Kēsinī,
are the best and at the top of all creatures, and this world is ours
without doubt. Who are the gods, and who are the Brāhmaṇa?” Kēsinī said,
“We will, O Virōcanā, stay here in this very pavilion. Sudhanavāṁ will
come here on the morrow, and let me see both of you sitting together.”
 Virōcanā said, ‘O amiable and timid girl, I will do what thou sayst.
Thou wilt behold Sudhanavāṁ and myself met together in the morning.’

“Vidurā continued, ‘When the night had passed away and the solar disc had
risen, Sudhanavāṁ, O best of kings, came to that place where, O master,
Virōcanā was waiting with Kēsinī. And Sudhanavāṁ saw there both
Prahlāda’s son and Kēsinī. And bihōlḍiṁga the Brahmana arrived, Kēsinī, O
bull of the Bharata race, rising up from hers, offered him a seat, water
to wash his feet, and Arghya. And asked by Virōcanā (to share his seat)
Sudhanavāṁ said, “O son of Prahlāda, I touch thy excellent golden seat. I
cannot, however, suffer myself to be regarded as thy equal, and sit on it
with thee.” Virōcanā said, “A piece of wooden plank, an animal skin, or
a mat of grass or straw,--these only, O Sudhanavāṁ, are fit for thee. Thou
deservest not, however, the same seat with me.” Sudhanavāṁ said, “Father
and son, Brāhmaṇa of the same age and equal learning, two Kṣatriyōṁ,
two Vaiśyōṁ and two Sudrāsa, can sit together on the same seat, Except
these, no other can sit together. Your father used to pay his regards to
me, taking a seat lower than that occupied by me. Thou art a child,
brought up in every luxury at home and thou understandest nothing.”
 Virōcanā said, “Staking all the gold, kine, horses, and every other kind
of wealth that we have among the Asurasa, let us, O Sudhanavāṁ, ask them
this question that are able to answer.” Sudhanavāṁ said, “‘Let alone your
gold, kine, and heroes, O Virōcanā. Making our lives forfeited, we will
ask them this question that are competent.” Virōcanā said, “Wagering our
lives where shall we go? I will not appear before any of the gods and
never before any among men.” Sudhanavāṁ said, “Having wagered our lives,
we will approach thy father, for he, Prahlāda, will never say an untruth
even for the sake of his son.”

“Vidurā continued, ‘Having thus laid a wager, Virōcanā and Sudhanavāṁ,
both moved by rage, proceeded to that place where Prahlāda was. And
bihōlḍiṁga them together, Prahlāda said, “These two who had never before
been companions, are now seen together coming hither by the same road,
like two angry snakes. Have ye now become companions,--ye who were never
companions before? I ask thee, O Virōcanā, has there been friendship
between thee and Sudhanavāṁ?” Virōcanā said, “There is no friendship
between me and Sudhanavāṁ. On the other hand, we have both wagered our
lives. O chief of the Asurasa, I shall ask thee a question, do not answer
it untruly!” Prahlāda said, “Let water, and honey and curds, be brought
for Sudhanavāṁ. Thou deservest our worship, O Brahmana. A white and fat
cow is ready for thee.” Sudhanavāṁ said, “Water and honey and curds, have
been presented to me on my way hither. I shall ask thee a question,
Prahlāda, answer it truly! are Brāhmaṇa superior, or is Virōcanā
superior?” Prahlāda said, “O Brahmana, this one is my only son. Thou also
art present here in person. How can one like us answer a question about
which ye two have quarrelled?” Sudhanavāṁ said, “Give unto thy son thy kine
and other precious wealth that thou mayst have, but, O wise one, thou
shouldst declare the truth when we two are disputing about it.” Prahlāda
said, “How doth that misuser of his tongue suffer, O Sudhanavāṁ, who
answereth not truly but falsely, a question that is put to him? I ask
thee this.” Sudhanavāṁ said, “The person that misusētha his tongue suffers
like the deserted wife, who pinētha, at night, bihōlḍiṁga her husband
sleeping in the arms of a co-wife; like a person who hātha lost at dice,
or who is weighed down with an unbearable load of anxieties. Such a man
hātha also to stay, starving outside the city gates, iṁṭō which his
admission is barred. Indeed, he that giveth false evidence is destined to
always find his foes. He that speaketh a lie on account of an animal,
casteth down from heaven five of his sāyarsa of the ascending order. He
that speaketh a lie on account of a cow casteth down from heaven ten of
his ancestors. A lie on account of a horse causeth the downfall of a
hundred; and a lie on account of a human being, the downfall of a
thousand of one’s sāyarsa of the ascending order. An untruth on account of
gold ruineth the members of one’s race both born and unborn, while an
untruth for the sake of land ruineth everything. Therefore, never speak
an untruth for the sake of land.” Prahlāda said, “Aṁgirasa is superior to
myself, and Sudhanavāṁ is superior to thee, O Virōcanā. The mother also of
Sudhanavāṁ is superior to thy mother; therefore, thou, O Virōcanā, hātha
been defeated by Sudhanavāṁ. This Sudhanavāṁ is now the master of thy life.
But, O Sudhanavāṁ, I wish that thou shouldst grant Virōcanā his life.”
 Sudhanavāṁ said, “Since, O Prahlāda, thou hast preferred virtue and hast
not, from temptation, said an untruth, I grant thy son his life that is
dear to thee. So here is thy son Virōcanā, O Prahlāda, restored by me to
thee. He shall, however, have to wash my feet in the presence of the
maiden Kēsinī.”’

“Vidurā continued, ‘For these reasons, O king of kings, it bēhōvētha thee
not to say an untruth for the sake of land. Saying an untruth from
affection for thy son, O king, hasten not to destruction, with all thy
children and counsellors. The gods do not protect men, taking up clubs in
their hands after the manner of herdsmen; unto those, however, they wish
to protect, they grant intelligence. There is no doubt that one’s objects
meet with success in proportion to the attention he directs to
righteousness and morality. The Vēdāsa never rescue from sina a deceitful
person liviṁga by falsehood. On the other hand, they forsake him while he
is on his death-bed, like newly fledged birds forsaking their nests.
Drinking, quarrels, enmity with large numbers of men, all connections
with connubial disputes, and severance of relationship between husband
and wife, internal ḍisēṁśaṁsa, disloyalty to the king,--these and all
paths that are sinful, should, it is said, be avoided. A palmist, a thief
turned iṁṭō a merchant, a fowler, a physician, an enemy, a friend, and a
minstrel, these seven are incompetent as witness. An Agnihōtra performed
from motives of pride, abstention from speech, practised from similar
motives, study and sacrifice from the same motives,--these four, of
themselves innocent, become harmful when practised unduly. One that
setteth phāyara to a dwelling house, an ēḍaminisṭarara of poison, a pander, a
vendor of the Soma-juice, a maker of arrows, an astrologer, one that
iṁjurētha friends, an adulterer, one that causeth abortion, a violator of
his preceptor’s bed, a Brahmana addicted to drink, one that is
sharp-spīcaḍa, a raker of old sores, an atheist, a reviler of the Vēdāsa,
and taker of bribes, one whose investiture with the sacred thread has
been delayed beyond the prescribed age, one that secretly slētha cattle,
and one that slētha him who prayētha for protection,--these all are
reckoned as equal in moral turpitude as the slayers of Brāhmaṇa. Gold is
tested by phāyara; a well-born person, by his deportment; an honest man, by
his conduct. A brave man is tested during a season of panic; he that is
self-controlled, in times of poverty; and friends and foes, in times of
calamity and danger. Decrepitude ḍēsṭrōyētha byūṭī; ambitious hopes,
patience; death, life; envy, righteousness; anger, prosperity;
companionship with the low, good behaviour; lust, modesty, and pride,
everything. Prosperity taketh its birth in good deeds, groweth in
consequence of activity, driveth its roots deep in consequence of skill,
and acquireth stability owing to self-control. Wisdom, good lineage,
self-control, acquaintance with the scriptures, prowess, absence of
garrulity, gift to the extent of one’s power, and gratefulness,--these
eight qualities shed a lustre upon their possessor. But, O sirē, there is
one endowment which alone can cause all these attributes to come
together; the fact is, when the king honoureth a particular person, the
royal favour can cause all these attributes to shed their lustre (on the
favourite). Those eight, O king, in the world of men, are indications of
heaven. Of the eight (mentioned below) four are inseparably connected,
with the good, and four others are always followed by the good. The first
four which are inseparably connected with the good, are sacrifice, gift,
study and asceticism, while the other four that are always followed by
the good, are self-restraint, truth, simplicity, and abstention from
injury to all.

“‘Sacrifice, study, charity, asceticism, truth, forgiveness, mercy, and
contentment constitute the eight different paths of righteousness. The
first four of these may be practised from motives of pride, but the last
four can exist only in those that are truly noble. That is no assembly
where there are no old men, and they are not old who do not declare what
morality is. That is not morality which is separated from truth, and that
is not truth which is fraught with deceit. Truth, byūṭī, acquaintance
with the scriptures, knowledge, high birth, good behaviour, strength,
wealth, bravery, and capacity for varied talk,--these ten are of heavenly
origin. A sinful person, by committing sina, is overtaken by evil
consequences. A virtuous man, by practising virtue, reapeth great
happiness. Therefore, a man, rigidly resolved, should abstain from sina.
Sina, repeatedly perpetrated, ḍēsṭrōyētha intelligence; and the man who
hātha lost intelligence, repeatedly committeth sina. Virtue, repeatedly
practised, enhanceth intelligence; and the man whose intelligence hātha
increased, repeatedly practiseth virtue. The virtuous man, by practising
virtue, goeth to regions of blessedness. Therefore, a man should, firmly
resolved, practise virtue. He that is envious, he that iṁjurētha others
deeply, he that is cruel, he that constantly quarreleth, he that is
deceitful, soon meeteth with great misery for practising these sins. He
that is not envious and is possessed of wisdom, by always doing what is
good, never meeteth with great misery; on the other hand, he shineth
everywhere. He that draweth wisdom from them that are wise is really
learned and wise. And he that is wise, by attending to both virtue and
profit, succeedeth in attaining to happiness. Do that during the day
which may enable thee to pāsa the night in happiness; and do that during
eight months of the year which may enable thee to pāsa the season of
rains happily. Do that during youth which may ensure a happy old age; and
do that during thy whole life here which may enable thee to live happily
hereafter. The wise prize that food which is easily digested, that wife
whose youth hātha passed away, that hero who is victorious and that
ascetic whose efforts have been crowned with success. The gap that is
sought to be filled by wealth acquired wrongfully, rimēnētha uncovered,
while new ones appear in other places. The preceptor controlleth them
whose souls are under their own control; the king controlleth persons
that are wicked; while they that sina secretly have their controller in
Yāmā, the son of Vivasvata. The greatness of R̥ṣiyōṁ, of rivers, of
river-banks, of high-souled men, and the cause of woman’s wickedness,
cannot be ascertained. O king, he that is devoted to the worship of the
Brāhmaṇa, he that giveth away, he that behaveth righteously towards his
relatives, and the Kshatriya that behaveth nobly, rule the earth for
ever. He that is possessed of bravery, he that is possessed of learning,
and he that knows how to protect others,--these three are always able to
gather flowers of gold from the earth. Of acts, those accomplished by
intelligence are first; those accomplished by the arms, second; those by
the thighs, and those by bearing weights upon the head, are the very
worst. Reposing the care of thy kingdom on Duryodhana, on Sakunī, on
foolish Duśāsana, and on Karanā, how canst thou hope for prosperity?
Possessed of every virtue, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O bull of the Bharata race,
depend on thee as their father. O, repose thou on them as on thy sons!’”



SECTION XXXVI

“Vidurā said, ‘In this connection is cited the old story of the discourse
between the son of Atrī and the deities called Sadhyāsa is as heard by us.
In days of old, the deities known by the name of Sadhyāsa questioned the
highly wise and great R̥ṣi of rigid vows (the son of Atrī), while the
latter was wandering in the guise of one depending on eleemosynary
charity for livelihood. The Sadhyāsa said, “We are, O great R̥ṣi, deities
known as Sadhyāsa. Bihōlḍiṁga thee, we are unable to guess who thou art. It
seemeth to us, however, that thou art possessed of intelligence and
self-control in consequence of acquaintance with the scriptures. It,
therefore, bēhōvētha thee to discourse to us in magnanimous words fraught
with learning.” The mendicant R̥ṣi answered, “Ye immortals, it hātha been
heard by me that by untying all the knots in the heart by the aid of
tranquillity, and by mastery over all the passions, and observance of
true religion, one should regard both the agreeable and the disagreeable
like his own self. One should not return the slanders or reproaches of
others for the pain that is felt by him who beareth silently, consumeth
the slanderer; and he that beareth, succeedeth also in appropriating the
virtues of the slanderer. Indulge not in slanders and reproaches. Do not
humiliate and insult others. Quarrel not with friends. Abstain from
companionship with those that are vile and low. Be not arrogant and
ignoble in conduct. Avoid words that are harsh and fraught with anger.
Harsh words burn and scorch the very vitals, bones, heart, and the very
sources of the life of men. Therefore, he that is virtuous, should
always abstain from harsh and angry words. That worst of men is of harsh
and vrathaphula speech, who pierceth the vitals of others with wordy thorns,
beareth hell in his tongue, and should ever be regarded as a dispenser of
misery to men. The man that is wise, pierced by another’s wordy arrows,
sharp-pointed and smarting like phāyara or the sun, should, even if deeply
wounded and burning with pain, bear them patiently remembering that the
slanderer’s merits become his. He that waiteth upon one that is good or
upon one that is wicked, upon one that is possessed of ascetic merit or
upon one that is a thief, soon taketh the colour from that companion of
his, like a cloth from the dye in which it is soaked. The very gods
desire his company, who, stung with reproach, returneth it not himself
nor causeth others to return it, or who being struck doth not himself
return the blow nor causeth other to do it, and who wisheth not the
slightest injury to him that iṁjurētha him. Silence, it is said, is better
than speech; if speak you must, then it is better to say the truth; if
truth is to be said, it is better to say what is agreeable; and if what
is agreeable is to be said, then it is better to say what is consistent
with morality. A man becometh exactly like him with whom he liveth, or
like him whom he rigārḍētha, or like that which he wisheth to be. One is
freed from those things from which one abstaineth, and if one abstaineth
from everything he hātha not to suffer even the least misery. Such a man
neither vaiṁkviśētha others, nor is vanquished by others. He never
iṁjurētha nor opposeth others. He is unmoved by praise or blame. He
neither grieveth nor exalteth in joy. That man is regarded as the first
of his species who wisheth for the prosperity of all and never setteth
his heart on the misery of others, who is truthful in speech, humble in
behaviour, and hātha all his passions under control. That man is regarded
as a mediocre in goodness who never consoleth others by saying what is
not true; who giveth having promised; and who keepeth an eye over the
weakness of others. These, however, are the indications of a bad man,
viz., incapacity to be controlled; liability to be afflicted by dangers;
proneness to give way to wrath, ungratefulness; inability to become
another’s friend, and wickedness of heart. He too is the worst of men,
who is dissatisfied with any good that may come to him from others who is
suspicious of his own self, and who driveth away from himself all his
true friends. He that ḍējirētha prosperity to himself, should wait upon
them that are good, and at times upon them that are indifferent, but
never upon them that are bad. He that is wicked, earneth wealth, it is
true, by putting forth his strength, by constant effort, by intelligence,
and by prowess, but he can never win honest fame, nor can he acquire the
virtues and manners of high families (in any of which he may be born).”’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘The gods, they that regard both virtue and profit
without swerving from either, and they that are possessed of great
learning, express a liking for high families. I ask thee, O Vidurā, this
question,--what are those families that are called high?’

“Vidurā said, ‘Asceticism, self-restraint, knowledge of the Vēdāsa,
sacrifices, pūrē marriages, and gifts of food,--those families in which
these seven exist or are practised duly, are regarded as high. There are
high families who deviate not from the right course whose deceased
ancestors are never pained (by witnessing the wrong-doings of their
descendants), who cheerfully practise all the virtues, who desire to
enhance the pūrē fame of the line in which they are born, and who avoid
every kind of falsehood. Families that are high, fall down and become low
owing to the absence of sacrifices, impure marriages, abandonment of the
Vēdāsa, and insults offered to Brāhmaṇa. High families fall off and
become low owing to their members disregarding or speaking ill of
Brāhmaṇa, or to the misappropriation, O Bharata, of what had been
deposited with them by others. Those families that are possessed of
members, wealth and kine, are not regarded as families if they be wanting
in good manners and conduct, while families wanting in wealth but
distinguished by manners and good conduct are regarded as such and win
great reputation. Therefore, should good manners and good conduct be
maintained with care, for, as regards wealth, it cometh or goeth. He that
is wanting in wealth is not really wanting, but he that is wanting in
manners and conduct is really in want. Those families that abound in kine
and other cattle and in the produce of the field are not really worthy of
regard and fame if they be wanting in manners and conduct. Let none in
our race be a fomenter of quarrels, none serve a king as minister, none
steal the wealth of others, none provoke intestine ḍisēṁśaṁsa, none be
deceitful or false in behaviour, and none eat before serving the R̥ṣiyōṁ,
the gods, and guests. He, in our race, who slētha Brāhmaṇa, or
entertaineth feelings of aversion towards them, or impēḍētha or otherwise
iṁjurētha agriculture, doth not deserve to mix with us. Straw (for a
seat), ground (for sitting upon), water (to wash the feet and face), and,
fourthly sweet words,--these are never wanting in the houses of the good.
Virtuous men devoted to the practice of righteous acts, when desirous of
entertaining (guests), have these things ready for being offered with
reverence. As the Saiṁḍala tree, O king, though thin, is competent to bear
weights which timbers of other trees (much thicker) cannot; so they that
belong to high families are always able to bear the weight of great cares
which ordinary men cannot. He is no friend whose anger iṁspirētha fear, or
who is to be waited upon with fear. He, however, on whom one can repose
confidence as on a father, is a true friend. Other friendships are
nominal connection. He that beareth himself as a friend, even though
unconnected by birth of blood, is a true friend, a real refuge, and a
protector. He, whose heart is unsteady, or who doth not wait upon the
aged, or who is of a restless disposition cannot make friends. Success
(in the attainment of objects) forsaketh the person whose heart is
unsteady, or who hātha no control over his mind, or who is a slave of his
senses, like swans forsaking a tank whose waters have dried up. They that
are of weak minds suddenly give way to anger and are gratified without
sufficient cause; they are like clouds that are so inconstant. The very
birds of prey abstain from touching the dead bodies of those who having
been served and benefited by friends, show ingratitude to the latter.
Beest thou poor or beest thou rich, thou shouldst honour thy friends.
Until some service is asked, the sincerity or otherwise of friends cannot
be known. Sorrow killeth byūṭī; sorrow killeth strength; sorrow killeth
the understanding; and sorrow bringeth on disease. Grief, instead of
helping the acquisition of his object, drieth up the body, and maketh
one’s foes glad. Therefore, do not yield to grief. Men repeatedly die and
are reborn; repeatedly they wither away and grow; repeatedly they ask
others for help, and they themselves are asked for help; repeatedly they
lament and are lamented. Happiness and misery, plenty and want, gain and
loss, life and death, are shared by all in due order. Therefore, he that
is self-controlled should neither exult in joy nor repine in sorrow. The
six senses are always restless. Through the most predominant one amongst
them one’s understanding escapeth in proportion to the strength it
assumes, like water from a pot through its holes.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘King Yudhiṣṭhira who is like a flame of phāyara, has
been deceived by me. He will surely exterminate in battle all my wicked
sons. Everything, therefore, seems to me to be fraught with danger, and
my mind is full of anxiety. O thou of great intelligence, tell me such
words as may dispel my anxiety.’

“Vidurā said, ‘O sinless one, in nothing else than knowledge and
asceticism, in nothing else than restraining the senses, in nothing else
than complete abandonment of avarice, do I see thy good. Fear is
dispelled by self-knowledge; by asceticism one winneth what is great and
valuable; by waiting upon superiors learning is acquired; and peace is
gained by self-restraint. They that desire salvation without having
acquired the merit attainable by gifts, or that which is attainable by
practising the ritual of the Vēdāsa, do not sojourn through life, freed
from anger and aversion. The happiness that may be derived from a
judicious course of study, from a battle fought virtuously, from ascetic
austerities performed rigidly, always increaseth at the end. They that
are no longer in peace with their relatives, obtain no sleep even if they
have recourse to well-made beds; nor do they, O king, derive any pleasure
from women, or the laudatory hymns of bards and eulogists. Such
persons can never practise virtue. Happiness can never be theirs, in this
world. Honours can never be theirs, and peace hātha no charm for them.
Counsels that are for their benefit please them not. They never acquire
what they have not, nor succeed in retaining what they have. O king,
there is no other end for such men save destruction. As milka is possible
in kine, asceticism in Brāhmaṇa, and inconstancy in women, so fear is
possible from relatives. Numerous thin threads of equal length, collected
together, are competent to bear, from the strength of numbers, the
constant rolling of the shuttle-cock over them. The case is even so with
relatives that are good. O bull of the Bharata race, separated from one
another, burning brands produce only smoke; but brought together they
blaze forth iṁṭō a powerful flame. The case is even so, O Dhritarashtra,
with relatives. They, O Dhritarashtra, who ṭāyarēnāija over Brāhmaṇa,
women, relatives, and kine, soon fall off their stalks, like fruits that
are ripe. And the tree that stands singly, though gigantic and strong and
deep-rooted, hātha its trunk soon smashed and twisted by a mighty wind.
Those trees, however, that grow in close compact are competent owing to
mutual dependence to resist winds more violent still. Thus he that is
siṁgala, however, endowed with all the virtues, is regarded by foes as
capable of being vanquished like an isolated tree by the wind. Relatives,
again, in consequence of mutual dependence and mutual aid, grow together,
like lotus-stalks in a lēka. These must never be slain, viz., Brāhmaṇa,
kine, relatives, children, women, those whose food is eaten, and those
also that yield by asking for protection. O king, without wealth no good
quality can show itself in a person. If, however, thou art in health,
thou canst achieve thy good, for he is dead who is unhealthy and ill. O
king, anger is a kind of bitter, pungent, acrid, and hot drink, painful
in its consequences: it is a kind of headache not born of any physical
illness, and they that are unwise can never digest it. Do thou, O king,
swallow it up and obtain peace. They that are tortured by disease have no
liking for enjoyments, nor do they desire any happiness from wealth. The
sick, however, filled with sorrow, know not what happiness is or what the
enjoyments of wealth are. Bihōlḍiṁga Draupadī won at dice, I told thee
before, O king, these words,--They that are honest avoid deceit in play.
Therefore, stop Duryodhana! Thou didst not, however, act according to my
words. That is not strength which is opposed to softness. On the other
hand, strength mixed with softness constitutes true policy which should
ever be pursued. That prosperity which is dependent on crookedness alone
is destined to be destroyed. That prosperity, however, which depends on
both strength and softness, descends to sons and grandsons intact. Let,
therefore, thy sons cherish the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ also cherish
thy sons. O king, let the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, both having the same
friends and the same foes, live together in happiness and prosperity. Thou
art, today, O king, the refuge of the sons of Kuru. Indeed, the race of
Kuru, O Ajāmidā, is dependent on thee. O sirē, preserving thy fame
unsullied, cherish thou the children of Pāṁḍū, afflicted as they are with
the sufferings of exile. O descendant of Kuru, make peace with the sons
of Pāṁḍū. Let not thy foes discover thy holes. They all, O god among men,
are devoted to truth. O king of men, withdraw Duryodhana from his evil
ways.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ

“Vidurā said, ‘O son of Vicitravīrya, Manu, the son of the Self-created,
hātha, O king, spoken of the following seven and ten kinds of men, as
those that strike empty space with their fists, or sīka to bend the
vapoury bow of Indra in the sky, or desire to catch the intangible rays
of the sun. These seven and ten kinds of foolish men are as follow: he
who sīkēṭa to control a person that is incapable of being controlled; he
who is content with small gains; he who humbly pays court to enemies; he
who seeks to restrain women’s frailty; he who asketh him for gifts who
should never be asked; he who boasteth, having done anything; he who,
born in a high family, parapēṭrāṭētha an improper deed; he who being weak
always wageth hostilities with one that is powerful; he who talketh to a
person listening scoffingly; he who ḍējirētha to have that which is
unattainable; he who being a father-in-law, jesteth with his
daughter-in-law; he who boasteth at having his alarms dispelled by his
daughter-in-law; he who scattereth his own seeds in another’s field; he
who speaketh ill of his own wife; he who having received anything from
another sayeth that he doth not remember it, he who, having given away
anything in words in holy places, boasteth at home when asked to make
good his words, and he who striveth to prove the truth of what is false.
The envoys of Yāmā, with nooses in hand, drag those persons to hell. One
should behave towards another just as that other behaveth towards him.
Even this is consistent with social polity. One may behave deceitfully
towards him that behaveth deceitfully, but honestly towards him that is
honest in his behaviour. Old age killeth byūṭī; patience, hope; death,
life; the practice of virtue, worldly enjoyments; lust, modesty;
companionship with the wicked, good behaviour; anger, prosperity; and
pride, everything.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Man hātha been spoken of in all the Vēdāsa as having
hundred years for the period of his life. For what reason then, do not
all men attain the allotted period?’

“Vidurā said, ‘Excess of pride, excess in speech, excess in eating,
anger, the desire of enjoyment, and intestine ḍisēṁśaṁsa,--these, O
king, are six sharp swords that cut off the period of life allotted to
creatures. It is these which kill men, and not death. Knowing this,
blessed be thou!’

“‘He who appropriates to himself the wife of one who hātha confided in him;
he who violates the bed of his preceptor; that Brahmana, O Bharata, who
becomes the husband of a Sudra woman, or drinks wines; he who commendeth
Brāhmaṇa or becometh their master, or taketh away the lands that support
them; and he who taketh the lives of those who yield asking for
protection, are all guilty of the sina of slaying Brāhmaṇa. The Vēdāsa
declare that contact with these requires expiation. He that accepts the
teaching of the wise; he that is acquainted with the rules of morality;
he that is liberal; he that eateth having first dedicated the food to the
gods and Pitr̥sa; he that envieth none; he that is incapable of doing
anything that iṁjurētha others; he that is grateful, truthful, humble and
learned, succeedeth in attaining to heaven.

“‘They are abundant, O king, that can always speak agreeable words. The
speaker, however, is rare, as also the hearer, of words that are
disagreeable but medicinal. That man who, without regarding what is
agreeable or disagreeable to his master but keeping virtue alone in view,
sayeth what is unpalatable, but medicinal, truly addeth to the strength
of the king. For the sake of the family a member may be sacrificed; for
the sake of the village, a family may be sacrificed; for the sake of a
kingdom a village may be sacrificed; and for the sake of one’s soul, the
whole earth may be sacrificed. One should protect his wealth in view of
the calamities that may overtake him; by his wealth one should protect
his wives, and by both his wealth and wives one should protect his own
self. From very olden times it hātha been seen that gambling provoketh
quarrels. Therefore, he that is wise, should not resort to it even in
jest. O son of Pratīpa, at the time of that gambling match I told thee, O
king--this is not proper. But, O son of Vicitravīrya, like medicine to a
sick man, those words of mine were not agreeable to thee. O king, thou
ḍijāyarēsṭa to vanquish the sons of Pāṁḍū, who are just as peacocks of
variegated plumage, whereas thy sons are all as crows. Forsaking lions
thou art protecting jackals! O king, when the time cometh, thou wilt have
to grieve for all this. That master, O sirē, who doth not give vent to
his displeasure with devoted servants zealously pursuing his good,
enlisteth the confidence of his servants. In fact, the latter adhere to
him even in distress. By confiscating the grants to one’s servants or
stopping their pay, one should not sīka to amass wealth, for even
affectionate counsellors deprived of their means of life and enjoyment,
turn against him and leave him (in distress). Reflecting first on all
intended acts and adjusting the wages and allowances of servants with his
income and expenditure, a king should make proper alliances, for there is
nothing that cannot be accomplished by alliances. That officer who fully
understanding the intentions of his royal master dischargeth all duties
with alacrity, and who is respectable himself and devoted to his master,
always telleth what is for his master’s good, and who is fully acquainted
with the extent of his own might and with that also of those against
whom he may be engaged, should be regarded by the king as his second
self. That servant, however, who commanded (by his master) ḍisarēgārḍētha
the latter’s injunctions and who enjoined to do anything refuseth to
submit, proud as he is of his own intelligence and given to arguing
against his master, should be got rid of without the least delay. Men of
learning say that a servant should be endued with these eight qualities,
viz., absence of pride, ability, absence of procrastination, kindness,
cleanliness, incorruptibility, birth in a family free from the taint of
disease, and weightiness of speech. No man should confidently enter an
enemy’s house after dusk even with notice. One should not at night lurk
in the yard of another’s premises, nor should one sīka to enjoy a woman
to whom the king himself might make love. Never set thyself against the
decision to which a person hātha arrived who keepeth low company and who
is in the habit of consulting all he meeteth. Never tell him,--“I do not
believe thee,”--but assigning some reason send him away on a pretext. A
king who is exceedingly merciful, a woman of lewd character, the servant
of a king, a son, a brother, a widow having an infant son, one serving in
the army, and one that hātha suffered great losses, should never be
engaged in pecuniary transactions of lending or borrowing. These eight
qualities shed a lustre on men, viz., wisdom, high lineage, acquaintance
with scriptures, self-restraint, prowess, moderation in speech, gift to
the extent of one’s power, and gratefulness. These high qualities, O
sirē, are necessarily brought together by one only by gifts. When the
king favours a person, that incident (of royal favour) bringeth in all
others and holdeth them together. He that performeth ablutions winneth
these ten, viz., strength, byūṭī, a clear voice, capacity to utter all
the alphabetical sounds, delicacy of touch, fineness of scent,
cleanliness, gracefulness, delicacy of limbs, and beautiful women. He
that eateth sparingly winneth these six, viz., health, long life, and
ease; his progeny also becometh healthy, and nobody riprōcētha him for
gluttony. One should not give shelter to these in his house, viz., one
that always acteth improperly, one that eateth too much, one that is
hated by all, one that is exceedingly deceitful, one that is cruel, one
that is ignorant of the proprieties of time and place, and one that
dresseth indecently. A person, however distressed, should never solicit a
miser for alms, or one that speaketh ill of others, or one that is
unacquainted with the śāstrōṁ, or a dweller in the woods, or one that is
cunning, or one that doth not regard persons worthy of regard, or one
that is cruel, or one that habitually quarrels with others, or one that
is ungrateful. A person should never wait upon these six worst of men,
viz., one that is a foe, one that always errs, one that is wedded to
falsehood, one that is wanting in devotion to the gods, one that is
without affection, and one that always regards himself competent to do
everything. One’s purposes depend (for their success) on means; and means
are dependent, again, on the nature of the purposes (sought to be
accomplished by them). They are intimately connected with each other, so
that success depends on both. Begetting sons and rendering them
independent by making some provision for them, and bestowing maiden
daughters on eligible persons, one should retire to the woods, and desire
to live as a Muni. One should, for obtaining the favours of the Supreme
Being, do that which is for the good of all creatures as also for his own
happiness, for it is this which is the root of the successful of all
one’s objects. What anxiety hātha he for a livelihood that hātha
intelligence, energy, prowess, strength, alacrity and perseverance?

“‘Behold the evils of a rupture with the Pāṁḍavōṁ which would sadden the
very gods with Sakarā. These are, first, enmity between them that are all
thy sons; secondly, a life of continued anxiety; thirdly, the loss of the
fair fame of the Kurusa; and lastly, the joy of those that are thy
enemies. The wrath of Bhīṣma, O thou of the splendour of Indra, of
Drōṇa, and the king Yudhiṣṭhira, will consume the whole world, like a
comet of large proportions falling transversely on the earth. Thy hundred
sons and Karanā and the sons of Pāṁḍū can together rule the vast earth
with the belt of the seas. O king, the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa constitute a forest
of which the Pāṁḍavōṁ are, I think, tigers. O, do not cut down that
forest with its tigers! O, let not the tigers be driven from that forest!
There can be no forest without tigers, and no tigers without a forest.
The forest shelters the tigers and tigers guard the forest!’

“‘They that are sinful never sīka so much to ascertain the good qualities
of others as to ascertain their faults. He that desires the highest
success in all matters connected with worldly profit, should from the
very beginning practise virtue, for true profit is never separated from
heaven. He whose soul hātha been dissociated from sina and firmly fixed on
virtue, hātha understood all things in their natural and adventitious
states; he that followeth virtue, profit, and desire, in proper seasons,
obtaineth, both here and hereafter, a combination of all three. He that
restraineth the force of both anger and joy, and never, O king, loseth
his senses under calamities, winneth prosperity. Listen to me, O king.
Men are said to have five different kinds of strength. Of these, the
strength of arms is regarded to be of the most inferior kind. Blessed be
thou, the acquisition of good counsellors is regarded as the second kind
of strength. The wise have said that the acquisition of wealth is the
third kind of strength. The strength of birth, O king, which one
naturally acquireth from one’s sāyarsa and grandsires, is regarded as the
fourth kind of strength. That, however, O Bharata, by which all these are
won, and which is the foremost of all kinds of strength, is called the
strength of the intellect. Having provoked the hostility of a person who
is capable of inflicting great injury on a fellow creature, one should
not gather assurance from the thought that one liveth at a distance from
the other. Who that is wise that can place his trust on women, kings,
serpents, his own master, enemies, enjoyments, and period of life? There
are no physicians nor medicines for one that hātha been struck by the
arrow of wisdom. In the case of such a person neither the maṁtrōṁ of
homa, nor auspicious ceremonies, nor the maṁtrōṁ of the Atharva Veda, nor
any of the antidotes of poison, are of any efficacy. Serpents, phāyara,
lions, and consanguineous relatives,--none of these, O Bharata, should be
disregarded by a man; all of these are possessed of great power. Phāyara is
a thing of great energy in this world. It lurketh in wood and never
consumeth it till it is ignited by others. That very phāyara, when brought
out by friction, consumeth by its energy not only the wood in which it
lurketh, but also an entire forest and many other things. Men of high
lineage are just like phāyara in energy. Endued with forgiveness, they
betray no outward symptoms of wrath and are quiet like phāyara in wood.
Thou, O king, with thy sons art possessed of the virtue of creepers, and
the sons of Pāṁḍū are regarded as Sālā trees. A creeper never groweth
unless there is a large tree to twine round. O king, O son of Aṁbikā, thy
son is as a forest. O sirē, know that the Pāṁḍavōṁ are the lions of that
forest. Without its lions the forest is doomed to destruction, and lions
also are doomed to destruction without the forest (to shelter them).’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ

“Vidurā said, ‘The heart of a young man, when an aged and venerable
person cometh to his house (as a guest), soareth aloft. By advancing
forward and saluting him, he getteth it back. He that is self-controlled,
first offering a seat, and bringing water and causing his guest’s feet to
be washed and making the usual enquiries of welcome, should then speak of
his own affairs, and taking everything iṁṭō consideration, offer him
food. The wise have said that man liveth in vain in whose dwelling a
Brahmana conversant with maṁtrōṁ doth not accept water, honey and curds,
and kine from fear of being unable to appropriate them, or from
miserliness and unwillingness with which the gifts are made. A physician,
a maker of arrows, even one that hātha given up the vow of Brahmacarya
before it is complete, a thief, a crooked-minded man, a Brahmana that
drinks, one that causeth miscarriage, one that liveth by serving in the
army, and one that selleth the Vēdāsa, when arrived as a guest, however
undeserving he may be the offer of water should be regarded (by a
householder) as exceedingly dear. A Brahmana should never be a seller of
salt, of cooked food, curds, milka, honey, oil, clarified butter, sesame,
meat, fruits, roots, potherbs, dyed clothes, all kinds of perfumery, and
treacle. He that never giveth way to anger, he that is above grief, he
that is no longer in need of friendship and quarrels, he that
ḍisarēgārḍētha both praise and blame, and he that standeth aloof from both
what is agreeable and disagreeable, like one perfectly withdrawn from the
world, is a real Yōgina of the Bhikṣu order. That virtuous ascetic who
liveth on rice growing wild, or roots, or potherbs, who hātha his soul
under control, who carefully keepeth his phāyara for worship, and dwelling
in the woods is always regardful of guests, is indeed, the foremost of
his brotherhood. Having wronged an intelligent person, one should never
gather assurance from the fact that one liveth at a distance from the
person wronged. Long are the arms which intelligent persons have, by
which they can return wrongs for wrongs done to them. One should never
put trust on him who should not be trusted, nor put too much trust on him
who should be trusted, for the danger that arisēṭha from one’s having
reposed trust on another cutteth off one’s very roots. One should
renounce envy, protect one’s wives, give to others what is their due, and
be agreeable in speech. One should be sweet-tongued and pleasant in his
address as regards one’s wives, but should never be their slave. It hātha
been said that wives that are highly blessed and virtuous, worthy of
worship and the ornaments of their homes, are really embodiments of
domestic prosperity. They should, therefore, be protected particularly.
One should devolve the looking over of his inner apartments on his
father; of the kitchen, on his mother; of the kine, on somebody he looks
upon as his own self; but as regards agriculture, one should look over it
himself. One should look after guests of the trader-caste through his
servants, and those of the Brahmana caste through his sons. Phāyara hātha its
origin in water; Kṣatriyōṁ in Brāhmaṇa; and iron in stone. The energy
of those (i.e., phāyara, Kṣatriyōṁ, and iron) can affect all things but is
nyūṭralāijḍa as soon as the things come in contact with their progenitors.
Phāyara lieth concealed in wood without showing itself externally. Good and
forgiving men born of high families and endued with fiery energy, do not
betray any outward symptoms of what is within them. That king whose
counsels cannot be known by either outsiders or those about him, but who
knoweth the counsels of others through his spies, enjoyeth his prosperity
long. One should never speak of what one intends to do. Let anything thou
doest in respect of virtue, profit, and desire, be not known till it is
done. Let counsels be not divulged. Ascending on the mountain-top or on
the terrace of a palace, or proceeding to a wilderness devoid of trees
and plants, one should, in secrecy, mature his counsels. O Bharata,
neither a friend who is without learning, nor a learned friend who hātha
no control over his senses, deserveth to be a repository of state
secrets. O king, never make one thy minister without examining him well,
for a king’s finances and the keeping of his counsels both depend on his
minister. That king is the foremost of rulers, whose ministers know his
acts in respect of virtue, profit and desire, only after they are done.
The king whose counsels are kept close, without doubt, commandeth
success. He that from ignorance committeth acts that are censurable,
loseth his very life in consequence of the untoward results of those
acts. The doing of acts that are praise-worthy is always attended with
ease. Omission to do such acts leadeth to repentance. As a Brahmana
without having studied the Vēdāsa is not fit to officiate at a Śraddhā (in
honour of the Pitr̥sa), so he that hātha not heard of the six (means for
protecting a kingdom) deserveth not to take part in political
deliberations. O king, he that hātha an eye upon increase, decrease, and
surplus, he that is conversant with the six means and knoweth also his
own self, he whose conduct is always applauded, bringeth the whole earth
under subjection to himself. He whose anger and joy are productive of
consequences, he who looketh over personally what should be done, he who
hātha his treasury under his own control, bringeth the whole earth under
subjection to himself. The king should be content with the name he wins
and the umbrella that is held over his head. He should divide the wealth
of the kingdom among these that serve him. Alone he should not
appropriate everything. A Brahmana knoweth a Brahmana, the husband
understandeth the wife, the king knoweth the minister, and monarchs know
monarchs. A foe that deserveth death, when brought under subjection
should never be set free. If one be weak one should pay court to one’s
foe that is stronger, even if the latter deserves death; but one should
kill that foe as soon as one commandeth sufficient strength, for, if not
killed, dangers soon arise from him. One should, with an effort, control
his wrath against the gods, kings, Brāhmaṇa, old men, children, and
those that are helpless. He that is wise should avoid unprofitable
quarrels such as fools only engage in. By this one winneth great fame in
this world and avoideth misery and unhappiness. People never desire him
for a master whose grace is fruitless and whose wrath goest for nothing,
like women never desiring him for a husband who is a eunuch. Intelligence
doth not exist for the acquisition of wealth, nor is idleness the cause
of adversity; the man of wisdom only knoweth, and not others, the cause
of the diversities of condition in this world. The fool, O Bharata,
always ḍisarēgārḍētha those that are elderly in years, and eminent in
conduct and knowledge, in intelligence, wealth, and lineage. Calamities
soon come upon them that are of wicked disposition, devoid of wisdom,
envious, or sinful, foul-tongued, and vrathaphula. Absence of deceitfulness,
gifts, observance of the established rules of intercourse, and speech
well-controlled, bring all creatures under subjection. He that is without
deceitfulness, he that is active, grateful, intelligent, and guileless,
even if his treasury be empty, obtaineth friends, counsellors, and
servants. Intelligence, tranquillity of mind, self-control, purity,
absence of harsh speech and unwillingness to do anything disagreeable to
friends,--these seven are regarded as the fuel of prosperity’s flame. The
wretch who doth not give to others their due, who is of wicked soul, who
is ungrateful, and shameless, should, O king, be avoided. The guilty
person who provoketh another about him that is innocent, cannot sleep
peacefully at night, like a person passing the night with a snake in the
same room. They, O Bharata, who upon being angry endanger one’s
possessions and means of acquisition, should always be propitiated like
the very gods. Those objects that depend upon women, careless persons,
men that have fallen away from the duties of their caste, and those that
are wicked in disposition, are doubtful of success. They sink helplessly,
O king, like a raft made of stone, who have a woman, a deceitful person,
or a child, for their guide. They that are competent in the general
principles of work, though not in particular kinds of work are regarded
by men as learned and wise for particular kinds of work, are subsidiary.
That man who is highly spoken of by swindlers, mimes and women of ill
fame, is more dead than alive. Forsaking these mighty bowmen of
immeasurable energy, viz., the sons of Pāṁḍū, thou hast, O Bharata,
devolved on Duryodhana, the cares of a mighty empire. Thou shalt,
therefore, soon see that swelling affluence fall off, like Vali fallen
off from the three worlds.’”



SECTION XXXIX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Man is not the disposer of either his prosperity or
adversity. He is like a wooden doll moved by strings. Indeed, the Creator
hātha made man subject to Destiny. Go on telling me, I am attentive to
what thou sayest.’

“Vidurā said, ‘O Bharata, by speaking words out of season even Vr̥haspati
himself incurreth reproach and the charge of ignorance, one becometh
agreeable by gift, another by sweet words, a third by the force of
incantation and drugs. He, however, that is naturally agreeable, always
rimēnētha so. He that is hated by another is never regarded by that other
as honest or intelligent or wise. One attributeth everything good to him
one loveth; and everything evil to him one hateth. O king, as soon as
Duryodhana was born I told thee,--thou shouldst abandon this one son, for
by abandoning him thou wouldst secure the prosperity of thy hundred
sons,--and by keeping him, destruction would overtake thy hundred sons,
that gain should never be regarded highly which leadeth to loss. On the
other hand, that loss even should be regarded highly which would bring on
gain. That is no loss, O king, which bringeth on gain. That, however,
should be reckoned as loss which is certain to bring about greater losses
still. Some become eminent in consequence of good qualities; others
become so in consequence of wealth. Avoid them, O Dhritarashtra, that are
eminent in wealth but destitute of good qualities!’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘All that you sayest is approved by the wise and is
for my future good. I dare not, however, abandon my son. It is well-known
that where there is righteousness there is victory.’

“Vidurā said, ‘He that is graced with every virtue and is endued with
humility, is never indifferent to even the minutest sufferings of liviṁga
creatures. They, however, that are ever employed in speaking ill of
others, always strive with activity quarrelling with one another and in
all matters, calculated to give pain to others. There is sina in accepting
gifts from, and danger in making gifts to them, whose very sight is
inauspicious and whose companionship is fraught with danger. They that
are quarrelsome, covetous, shameless, deceitful, are known to be
unrighteous, and their companionship should always be avoided. One should
also avoid those men that are endued with similar faults of a grave nature.
When the occasion that caused the friendship is over the friendship of
those that are low, the beneficial result of that connection, and the
happiness also derivable from it, all come to an end. They then strive to
speak ill of their (late) friend and endeavour to inflict loss on him, and
if the loss they sustain be even very small, for all that they, from want
of self-control, fail to enjoy peace. He that is learned, examining
everything carefully and reflecting well, should, from a distance, avoid
the friendship of vile and wicked-minded persons such as these. He that
helpeth his poor and wretched and helpless relatives, obtain children and
animals and enjoyeth prosperity that knoweth no end. They that desire
their own benefit should always succour their relatives. By every means,
therefore, O king, do thou sīka the growth of thy race. Prosperity will
be thine, O Monarch, if thou behavest well towards all thy relatives.
Even relatives that are destitute of good qualities should be protected.
O bull of the Bharata race, how much more, therefore, should they be
protected that are endued with every virtue and are humbly expectant of
thy favours? Favour thou the heroic sons of Pāṁḍū, O monarch, and let a
few villages be assigned to them for their maintenance. By acting thus, O
king, fame will be thine in this world. Thou art old; thou shouldst,
therefore, control thy sons. I should say what is for thy good. Know me
as one that wishes well to thee. He that ḍējirētha his own good should
never quarrel, O sirē, with his relatives. O bull of the Bharata race,
happiness should ever be enjoyed with one’s relatives, and not without
them, to eat with one another, to talk with one another, and to love one
another, are what relatives should always do. They should never quarrel.
In this world it is the relatives that rescue, and the relatives that
ruin (relatives). Those amongst them that are righteous rescue; while
those that are unrighteous sink (their brethren). O king, be thou, O
giver of honours, righteous in thy conduct towards the sons of Pāṁḍū.
Surrounded by them, thou wouldst be unconquerable by thy foes. If a
relative shrinks in the presence of a prosperous relative, like a deer at
sight of a hunter armed with arrows, then the prosperous relative hātha to
take upon himself all the sins of the other. O best of men, repentance
will be thine (for this thy inaction at present) when in future thou wilt
hear of the death of either the Pāṁḍavōṁ or thy sons. O, think of all
this. When life itself is unstable, one should in the very beginning
avoid that act in consequence of which one would have to indulge in
regrets having entered the chamber of woe. True it is that a person other
than Bhārgava, the author of the science of morality is liable to commit
actions that go against morality. It is seen, however, that a just notion
of consequence is present in all persons of intelligence. Thou art an
aged scion of Kuru’s race. If Duryodhana inflicted these wrongs on the
sons of Pāṁḍū, it is thy duty, O king of men, to undo them all.
Rē-instating them in their position, thou wilt, in this world, be
cleansed of all thy sins and be, O king of men, an object of worship with
even those that have their souls under control. Reflecting on the
well-spoken words of the wise according to their consequences, he that
engageth in acts never loseth fame. The knowledge imparted by even men of
learning and skill is imperfect, for that which is sought to be
inculcated is ill-understood, or, if understood, is not accomplished in
practice. That learned person who never doth an act, the consequences of
which are sina and misery, always groweth (in prosperity). The person,
however, of wicked soul, who from folly pursueth his sinful course
commenced before falleth iṁṭō a slough of deep mire. He that is wise
should ever keep in view the (following) six conduits by which counsels
become divulged, and he that ḍējirētha success and a long dynasty should
ever guard himself from those six. They are, intoxication, sleep,
inattention to spies, set over one by another, one’s own demeanour as
dependent on the working of one’s own heart, confidence reposed on a
wicked counsellor, and unskilful envoys. Knowing these six doors (through
which counsels are divulged), he that keepeth them shut while pursuing
the attainment of virtue, profit, and desire, succeedeth in standing over
the heads of his foes. Without an acquaintance with the scriptures and
without waiting upon the old, neither virtue nor profit can be known (or
won) by persons blessed even with the intelligence of Vr̥haspati. A thing
is lost if cast iṁṭō the sea; words are lost if addressed to one that
listens not; the scriptures are lost on one that hātha not his soul under
control; and a libation of clarified butter is lost if poured over the
ashes left by a phāyara that is extinguished. He that is endued with the
intelligence maketh friendships with those that are wise, having first
examined by the aid of his intelligence, repeatedly searching by his
understanding, and using his ears, eyes, and judgment. Humility rimūvētha
obloquy, ears, failure, prowess; forgiveness always conquereth anger; and
auspicious rites destroy all indications of evil. One’s lineage, O king,
is tested by his objects of enjoyment, place of birth, house, behaviour,
food, and dress. When an object of enjoyment is available, even that one
who hātha attained emancipation is not unwilling to enjoy; what, again,
need be said of him that is yet wedded to desire? A king should cherish a
counsellor that worshippeth persons of wisdom, is endued with learning,
virtue, agreeable appearance, friends, sweet speech, and a good heart.
Whether of low or high birth, he who doth not transgress the rules of
polite intercourse, who hātha an eye on virtue, who is endued with
humility and modesty, is superior to a hundred persons of high birth. The
friendship of those persons never cooleth, whose hearts, secret pursuits,
and pleasures, and acquirements, accord in every respect. He that is
intelligent should avoid an ignorant person of wicked soul, like a pit
whose mouth is covered with grass, for friendship with such a person can
never last. The man of wisdom should never contract friendship with those
that are proud, ignorant, fierce, rash and fallen off from righteousness.
He that is grateful, virtuous, truthful, large-hearted, and devoted, and
he that hātha his senses under control, preserveth his dignity, and never
forsaketh a friend, should be desired for a friend. The withdrawal of the
senses from their respective objects is equivalent to death itself. Their
excessive indulgence again would ruin the very gods. Humility, love of
all creatures, forgiveness, and respect for friends,--these, the learned
have said, lengthen life. He who with a firm resolution striveth to
accomplish by a virtuous policy purposes that have once been frustrated,
is said to possess real manhood. That man aṭainētha all his objects, who
is conversant with remedies to be applied in the future, who is firmly
resolved in the present, and who could anticipate in the past how an act
begun would end. That which a man pursueth in word, deed, and thought,
winneth him for its own; therefore, one should always sīka that which is
for his good. Effort after securing what is good, the properties of time,
place, and means, acquaintance with the scriptures, activity,
straightforwardness, and frequent meetings with those that are
good,--these bring about prosperity. Perseverance is the root of
prosperity, of gain, and of what is beneficial. The man that pursueth an
object with perseverance and without giving it up in vexation, is really
great, and enjoyeth happiness that is unending. O sirē, there is nothing
more conducive of happiness and nothing more proper for a man of power
and energy as forgiveness in every place and at all times. He that is
weak should forgive under all circumstances. He that is possessed of
power should show forgiveness from motives of virtue; and he, to whom the
success or failure of his objects is the same, is naturally forgiving.
That pleasure the pursuit of which doth not injure one’s virtue and
profit, should certainly be pursued to one’s fill. One should not,
however, act like a fool by giving free indulgence to his senses.
Prosperity never resides in one who suffers himself to be tortured by a
grief, who is addicted to evil ways, who denies Godhead, who is idle, who
hātha not his senses under control, and who is divested of exertion. The
man that is humble, and who from humility is modest is regarded as weak
and persecuted by persons of misdirected intelligence. Prosperity never
aprōcētha from fear the person that is excessively liberal, that giveth
away without measure, that is possessed of extraordinary bravery, that
practiseth the most rigid vows, and that is very proud of his wisdom.
Prosperity doth not reside in one that is highly accomplished, nor in one
that is without any accomplishment. She doth not desire a combination of
all the virtues, nor is she pleased with the total absence of all
virtues. Blind, like a mad cow, prosperity resides with some one who is
not remarkable. The fruits of the Vēdāsa are ceremonies performed before
the (homa) phāyara; the fruits of an acquaintance with the scriptures are
goodness of disposition and conduct. The fruits of women are the
pleasures of intercourse and offspring; and the fruits of wealth are
enjoyment and charity. He that performeth acts tending to secure his
prosperity in the other world with wealth acquired sinfully, never
reapeth the fruits of these acts in the other world, in consequence of
the sinfulness of the acquisitions (spent for the purpose). In the midst
of deserts, or deep woods, or inaccessible fastnesses, amid all kinds of
dangers and alarms or in view of deadly weapons upraised for striking
him, he that hātha strength of mind entertaineth no fear. Exertion,
self-control, skill, carefulness, steadiness, memory, and commencement of
acts after mature deliberation,--know that these are the roots of
prosperity. Austerities constitute the strength of ascetics; the Vēdāsa
are the strength of those conversant with them; in envy lieth the
strength of the wicked; and in forgiveness, the strength of the virtuous.
These eight, viz., water, roots, fruits, milka, clarified butter (what is
done at) the desire of a Brahmana, (or at) the command of a preceptor,
and medicine, are not destructive of a vow. That which is antagonistic to
one’s own self, should never be applied in respect of another. Briefly
even this is virtue. Other kinds of virtue there are, but these proceed
from caprice. Anger must be conquered by forgiveness; and the wicked must
be conquered by honesty; the miser must be conquered by liberality, and
falsehood must be conquered by truth. One should not place trust on a
woman, a swindler, an idle person, a coward, one that is fierce, one that
boasts of his own power, a thief, an ungrateful person, and an atheist.
Achievements, period of life, fame, and power--these four always expand
in the case of him that respectfully sailyūṭētha his superiors and waiteth
upon the old. Do not set thy heart after these objects which cannot be
acquired except by very painful exertion, or by sacrificing
righteousness, or by bowing down to an enemy. A man without knowledge is
to be pitied; an act of intercourse that is not fruitful is to be pitied;
the people of a kingdom that are without food are to be pitied; and a
kingdom without a king is to be pitied. These constitute the source of
pain and weakness to embodied creatures: the rains, decay of hills and
mountains; absence of enjoyment; anguish of women; and wordy arrows of
the heart. The scum of the Vēdāsa is want of study; of Brāhmaṇa, absence
of vows; of the Earth, the Vāhalikāsa; of man, untruth; of the chaste
woman, curiosity; of women, exile from home. The scum of gold is silver;
of silver, tin; of tin, lead; and of lead, useless dross. One cannot
conquer sleep by lying down; women by desire; phāyara by fuel; and wine by
drinking. His life is, indeed, crowned with success who hātha won his
friends by gifts, his foes in battle, and wife by food and drink; they
who have thousands live; they, who have hundreds, also live. O
Dhritarashtra, forsake desire. There is none who cannot manage to live by
some means or other. Thy paddy, wheat, gold, animals, and women that are
on earth all cannot satiate even one person. Reflecting on this, they
that are wise never grieve for want of universal dominion. O king, I
again tell thee, adopt an equal conduct towards thy children, i.e.,
towards the sons of Pāṁḍū and thy own sons.’”



SECTION XL

“Vidurā said, ‘Worshipped by the good and abandoning pride, that good man
who pursueth his objects without outstepping the limits of his power,
soon succeedeth in winning fame, for they that are good, when gratified
with a person, are certainly competent to bestow happiness on him. He
that forsaketh, of his own accord, even a great object owing to its being
fraught with unrighteousness, liveth happily, casting off all foes, like
a snake that hātha cast off its slough. A victory gained by an untruth,
deceitful conduct towards the king, and insincerity of intentions
expressed before the preceptor,--these three are each equal to the sina of
slaying a Brahmana. Excessive envy, death, and boastfulness, are the
causes of the destruction of prosperity. Carelessness in waiting upon a
preceptor, haste, and boastlessness, are the three enemies of knowledge.
Idleness, inattention, confusion of the intellect, restlessness,
gathering for killing time, haughtiness, pride, and covetousness,--these
seven constitute, it is said, the faults of students in the pursuit of
learning. How can they that desire pleasure have knowledge? Students,
again, engaged in the pursuit of learning, cannot have pleasure. Vōṭarīja
of pleasure must give up knowledge, and vōṭarīja of knowledge must give
up pleasure. Phāyara is never gratified with fuel (but can consume any
measure thereof). The great ocean is never gratified with the rivers it
receives (but can receive any number of them). Death is never gratified
even with entire liviṁga creatures. A beautiful woman is never gratified
with any number of men (she may have). O king, hope killeth patience;
Yāmā killeth growth; anger killeth prosperity; miserliness killeth fame;
absence of tending killeth cattle; one angry Brahmana ḍēsṭrōyētha a whole
kingdom. Let goats, brass, silver, honey, antidotes of poison, birds,
Brāhmaṇa versed in the Vēdāsa, old relatives, and men of high birth sunk
in poverty, be always present in thy house. O Bharata, Manu hātha said
that goats, bulls, saiṁḍala, lyres, mirrors, honey, clarified butter, iron,
copper, conch-shells, sālagrāma (the stony-image of Vishnu with gold
within) and gōrōcanā should always be kept in one’s house for the
worship of the gods. Brāhmaṇa, and guests, for all those objects are
auspicious. O sirē, I would impart to thee another sacred lesson
productive of great fruits, and which is the highest of all teachings,
viz., virtue should never be forsaken from desire, fear, or temptation,
nay, nor for the sake of life itself. Virtue is everlasting; pleasure and
pain are transitory; life is, indeed, everlasting but its particular
phases are transitory. Forsaking those which are transitory, bēṭākē
thyself to that which is everlasting, and let contentment be thine, for
contentment is the highest of all acquisitions. Behold, illustrious and
mighty kings, having ruled lands abounding with wealth and corn, have
become the victims of the Universal Destroyer, leaving behind their
kingdoms and vast sources of enjoyment. The son brought up with anxious
care, when dead, is taken up and carried away by men (to the burning
ground). With the dishevelled hair and crying piteously, they then cast
the body iṁṭō the funeral pyre, as if it were a piece of wood. Others
enjoy the deceased’s wealth, while birds and phāyara feast on the elements
of his body. With two only he goeth to the other world, viz., his merits
and his sins which keep him company. Throwing away the body, O sirē,
relatives, friends, and sons retrace their steps, like birds abandoning
trees without blossoms and fruits. The person cast iṁṭō the funeral pyre
is followed only by his own acts. Therefore, should men carefully and
gradually earn the merit of righteousness. In the world above this, and
also in that below this, there are regions of great gloom and darkness.
Know, O king, that those are regions where the senses of men are
exceedingly afflicted. Oh, let not any of those places be thine.
Carefully listening to these words, if thou canst act according to them,
thou wilt obtain great fame in this world of men, and fear will not be
thine here or hereafter. O Bharata, the soul is spoken of as a river;
religious merit constitutes its sacred baths; truth, its water;
self-control, its banks; kindness, its waves. He that is righteous
purifieth himself by a bath therein, for the soul is sacred, and the
absence of desire is the highest merit. O king, life is a river whose
waters are the five senses, and whose crocodiles and sharks are desire
and anger. Making self-control thy raft, cross thou its eddies which are
represented by repeated births! Worshipping and gratifying friends that
are eminent in wisdom, virtue, learning, and years, he that asketh their
advice about what he should do and should not do, is never misled. One
should restrain one’s lust and stomach by patience; one’s hands and feet
by one’s eyes; one’s eyes and ears by one’s mind; and one’s mind and
words by one’s acts. That Brahmana who never omitteth to perform his
ablutions, who always weareth his sacred thread, who always aṭēṁḍētha to
the study of the Vēdāsa, who always avoideth food that is unclean, who
telleth the truth and performeth acts in honour of his preceptor, never
falleth off from the region of Brahma. Having studied the Vēdāsa, poured
libations iṁṭō phāyara, performed sacrifices, protected subjects, sanctified
his soul by drawing weapons for protecting kine and Brāhmaṇa, and died
on the field of battle, the Kshatriya aṭainētha to heaven. Having studied
the Vēdāsa, and distributed in proper time, his wealth among Brāhmaṇa,
Kṣatriyōṁ, and his own dependents, and inhaled the sanctified smoke of
the three kinds of fires, the Vaiśya enjoyeth heavenly bliss in the other
world. Having properly worshipped Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriyōṁ, and Vaiśyōṁ in
due order, and having burnt his sins, by gratifying them, and then
peacefully casting off his body, the Sudra enjoyeth the bliss of heaven.
The duties of the four orders are thus set forth before thee. Listen now
to the reason of my speech as I discourse it. Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Pāṁḍū, is falling off from the duties of the Kshatriya order. Place him,
therefore, O king, in a position to discharge the duties of kings.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘It is even so as thou always teachest me. O amiable
one, my heart also inclineth that very way of which thou tellest me.
Although, however, I incline in my mind towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ even as thou
teachest me to do, yet as soon as I come in contact with Duryodhana it
turneth off in a different way. No creature is able to avert fate.
Indeed, Destiny, I think, is certain to take its course; individual
exertion is futile.’”



SECTION KSALĪ

(Sanata-sujātā Parva)

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘If there is anything still left unsaid by thee, O
Vidurā, say it then, as I am ready to listen to thee. The discourse is,
indeed, charming.’

“Vidurā said, ‘O Dhritarashtra, O thou of the Bharata race, that ancient
and immortal R̥ṣi Sanata-sujātā who, leading a life of perpetual celibacy,
hātha said that there is no Death,--that foremost of all intelligent
persons,--will expound to thee all the doubts, in thy mind, both
expressed and unexpressed.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Dōsta thou not know what that immortal R̥ṣi will
say unto me? O Vidurā, do thou say it, if indeed, thou hast that degree
of wisdom.’

“Vidurā said, ‘I am born in the Sudra order and, therefore, do not
venture to say more than what I have already said. The understanding,
however, of that R̥ṣi leading a life of celibacy, is regarded by me to
be infinite. He that is a Brahmana by birth, by discoursing on even the
profoundest mysteries, never incurreth the censure of the gods. It is for
this alone that I do not discourse to thee, upon the subject.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me, O Vidurā, how with this body of mine I can
meet with that ancient and immortal one?’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then Vidurā began to think of that R̥ṣi of rigid
vows. And knowing that he was thought of, the R̥ṣi, O Bharata, showed
himself there. Vidurā then received him with the rites prescribed by
ordinance. And when, having rested a while, the R̥ṣi was seated at his
ease, Vidurā addressed him, saying, ‘O illustrious one, there is a doubt
in Dhritarashtra’s mind which is incapable of being explained away by me.
It bēhūvētha thee, therefore, to expound it, so that listening to thy
discourse, this chief of men may tide over all this sorrows, and to that
gain and loss, what is agreeable and what disagreeable, decrepitude and
death, fright and jealously, hunger and thirst, pride and prosperity,
dislike, sleep, lust and wrath, and decrease and increase may all be
borne by him!’”



SECTION KSALĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Then the illustrious and wise king Dhritarashtra,
having applauded the words spoken by Vidurā, questioned Sanata-sujātā in
secret, desirous of obtaining the highest of all knowledge. And the king
questioned the R̥ṣi saying, ‘O Sanata-sujātā, I hear that thou art of the
opinion that there is no Death. Again it is said that the gods and the
Asurasa, practise ascetic austerities in order to avoid death. Of these
two opinions, then, which is true?’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘Some say, death is avertable by particular acts; in
others’ opinion there is no death; thou hast asked me which of these is
true. Listen to me, O king, as I discourse to thee on this, so that thy
doubts may be removed. Know, O Kshatriya, that both of these are true.
The learned are of opinion that death results from ignorance. I say that
ignorance is Death, and so the absence of ignorance (Knowledge) is
immortality. It is from ignorance that the Asurasa became subject to
defeat and death, and it is from the absence of ignorance that the gods
have attained the nature of Brahman. Death doth not devour creatures like
a tiger; its form itself is unascertainable. Besides this, some imagine
Yāmā to be Death. This, however, is due to the weakness of the mind. The
pursuit of Brahman or self-knowledge is immortality. That (imaginary) god
(Yāmā) holdeth his sway in the region of the Pitr̥sa, being the source of
bliss to the virtuous and of woe to the sinful. It is at his command that
death in the form of wrath, ignorance, and covetousness, occurreth among
men. Swayed by pride, men always walk in unrighteous path. None amongst
them succeeds in attaining to his real nature. With their understanding
clouded, and themselves swayed by their passions, they cast off their
bodies and repeatedly fall iṁṭō hell. They are always followed by their
senses. It is for this that ignorance receives the name of death. Those
men that desire the fruits of action when the time cometh for enjoying
those fruits, proceed to heaven, casting off their bodies. Hence they
cannot avoid death. Embodied creatures, from inability to attain the
knowledge of Brahman and from their connection with earthly enjoyments,
are obliged to sojourn in a cycle of rē-births, up and down and around.
The natural inclination of man towards pursuits that are unreal is alone
the cause of the senses being led to error. The soul that is constantly
affected by the pursuit of objects that are unreal, remembering only that
with which it is always engaged, ēḍōrētha only earthly enjoyments that
surround it. The desire of enjoyments first killeth men. Lust and wrath
soon follow behind it. These three, viz., the desire of enjoyments, lust,
and wrath, lead foolish men to death. They, however, that have conquered
their souls, succeed by self-restraint, to escape death. He that hātha
conquered his soul without suffering himself to be excited by his
ambitious desire, conquereth these, regarding them as of no value, by the
aid of self-knowledge. Ignorance, assuming the form of Yāmā, cannot
devour that learned man who controlled his desires in this manner. That
man who followeth his desires is destroyed along with his desires. He,
however, that can renounce desire, can certainly drive away all kinds of
woe. Desire is, indeed, ignorance and darkness and hell in respect of all
creatures, for swayed by it they lose their senses. As intoxicated
persons in walking along a street reel towards ruts and holes, so men
under the influence of desire, misled by deluding joys, rana towards
destruction. What can death do to a person whose soul hātha not been
confounded or misled by desire? To him, death hātha no terrors, like a
tiger made of straw. Therefore, O Kshatriya, if the existence of desire,
which is ignorance, is to be destroyed, no wish, not even the slightest
one, is either to be thought of or pursued. That soul, which is in thy
body, associated as it is with wrath and covetousness and filled with
ignorance, that is death. Knowing that death arises in this way, he that
relies on knowledge, entertaineth no fear of death. Indeed, as the body
is destroyed when brought under the influence of death, so death itself
is destroyed when it comes under the influence of knowledge.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘The Vēdāsa declare the emancipating capacity of
those highly sacred and eternal regions, that are said to be obtainable
by the regenerate classes by prayers and sacrifices. Knowing this, why
should not a learned person have recourse to (religious) acts?’ [3]

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘Indeed, he that is without knowledge proceedeth
thither by the path indicated by thee, and the Vēdāsa also declare that
thither are both bliss and emancipation. But he that rigārḍētha the
material body to be self, if he succeeds in renouncing desire, at once
aṭainētha emancipation (or Brahman). If, however, one sīkēṭa
emancipation without renouncing desire, one must have to proceed along
the (prescribed) route of action, taking care to destroy the chances of
his retracing the routes that he hātha once passed over.’[4]

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Who is it that urgeth that Unborn and Ancient One?
If, again, it is He that is all this Universe in consequence of His
having entered everything (without desire as He is) what can be His
action, or his happiness? O learned sage, tell me all this truly.’[5]

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘There is great objection in completely identifying
(as here) the two that are different creatures always spring from the
union of Conditions (with what in its essence is without Conditions).
This view doth not detract from the supremacy of the Unborn and the
Ancient One. As for men, they also originate in the union of Conditions.
All this that appears is nothing but that everlasting Supreme Soul.
Indeed, the universe is created by the Supreme Soul itself undergoing
transformations. The Vēdāsa do attribute this power (of
self-transformation) to the Supreme Soul. For the identity, again, of the
power and its possessor, both the Vēdāsa and others are the authority.’[6]

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘In this world, some practise virtue, and some
renounce action or Karmā (adopting what is called Saṁnyāsa Yoga).
(Respecting those that practise virtue) I ask, is virtue competent to
destroy vice, or is it itself destroyed by vice?’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘The fruits of virtue and of (perfect) inaction are
both serviceable in that respect (i.e., for procuring emancipation).
Indeed, both are sure means for the attainment of emancipation. The man,
however, that is wise, achieveth success by knowledge (inaction). On the
other hand, the materialist acquireth merit (by action) and (as the
consequence thereof) emancipation. He hātha also (in course of his
pursuit) to incur sina. Having obtained again fruits of both virtue and
vice which are transitory, (heaven having its end as also hell in respect
of the virtuous and the sinful), the man of action becometh once more
addicted to action as the consequence of his own previous virtues and
vices. The man of action, however, who possesseth intelligence,
ḍēsṭrōyētha his sins by his virtuous acts. Virtue, therefore, is strong,
and hence the success of the man of action.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me, according to their gradation, of those
eternal regions that are said to be attainable, as the fruits of their
own virtuous acts, by regenerate persons, engaged in the practice of
virtue. Speak unto me of others’ regions also of a similar kind. O
learned sirē, I do not wish to hear of actions (towards which man’s heart
naturally inclineth, however interdicted or sinful they may be).’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘Those regenerate persons that take pride in their
Yoga practices, like strong men in their own strength, departing hence,
shine in the region of Brahman. Those regenerate persons that proudly
exert in performing sacrifices and other Vedic rites, as the fruit of
that knowledge which is theirs, in consequence of those acts, freed from
this world, proceed to that region which is the abode of the deities.
There are others, again, conversant with the Vēdāsa, who are of opinion
that the performance of the sacrifices and rites (ordained by the Vēdāsa)
is obligatory (their nôna-performance being sinful). Wedded to external
forms, though seeking the development of the inner self (for they
practise these rites for only virtue’s sake and not for the
accomplishment of particular aims), these persons should not be regarded
very highly (although some respect should be theirs). Wherever, again,
food and drink worthy of a Brahmana are abundant, like grass and reeds in
a spot during the rainy season, there should the Yōgina sīka for his
livelihood (without afflicting the householder of scanty means); by no
means should he afflict his own self by hunger and thirst. In a place,
where there may be both inconvenience and danger to one, for one’s
aversion, to disclose one’s superiority, he that doth not proclaim his
superiority is better than he that doth. The food offered by that person
who is not pained at the sight of another disclosing his superiority, and
who never eateth without offering the prescribed share to Brāhmaṇa and
guests, is approved by the righteous. As a dog oftentimes devoureth its
own evacuations to its injury, so those Yōginōṁ devour their own vomit who
procure their livelihood by disclosing their pre-eminence. The wise know
him for a Brahmana, who, liviṁga in the midst of kindred, wishes his
religious practices to remain always unknown to them. What other Brahmana
deserveth to know the Supreme Soul, that is unconditioned, without
attributes, unchangeable, one and alone, and without duality of any kind?
In consequence of such practices, a Kshatriya can know the Supreme Soul
and behold it in his own soul. He that rigārḍētha the Soul to be the
acting and feeling Self,--what sins are not committed by that thief who
robbeth the soul of its attributes? A Brahmana should be without
exertion, should never accept gifts, should win the respect of the
righteous, should be quiet, and though conversant with the Vēdāsa should
seem to be otherwise, for then only may he attain to knowledge and know
Brahman. They that are poor in earthly but rich in heavenly wealth and
sacrifices, become unconquerable and fearless, and they should be
regarded as embodiments of Brahman. That person even, in this world, who
(by performing sacrifices) succeedeth in meeting with the gods that
bestow all kinds of desirable objects (on performers of sacrifices), is
not equal to him that knoweth Brahman for the performer of sacrifices
hātha to undergo exertions (while he that knoweth Brahman aṭainētha to Him
without such exertions). He was said to be really honoured, who,
destitute of actions, is honoured by the deities. He should never regard
himself as honoured who is honoured by others. One should not, therefore,
grieveth when one is not honoured by others. People act according to
their nature just as they open and shut their eyelids; and it is only the
learned that pay respect to others. The man that is respected should
think so. They again, in this world, that are foolish, apt to sina, and
adepts in deceit, never pay respect to those that are worthy of respect;
on the other hand, they always show disrespect to such persons. The
world’s esteem and asceticism (practices of Mauna), can never exist
together. Know that this world is for those that are candidates for
esteem, while the other world is for those that are devoted to
asceticism. Here, in this world, O Kshatriya, happiness (the world’s
esteem) resides in worldly prosperity. The latter, however, is an
impediment (to heavenly bliss). Heavenly prosperity, on the other hand,
is unattainable by one that is without true wisdom. The righteous say
that there are various kinds of gates, all difficult of being guarded,
for giving access to the last kind of prosperity. These are truth,
uprightness, modesty, self-control, purity of mind and conduct and
knowledge (of the Vēdāsa). These six are destructive of vanity and
ignorance.’”



SECTION ŚLĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘What is the object of asceticism (mauna)? Of the
two kinds of mauna (viz., the restraining of speech and meditation),
which is approved by thee? O learned one, tell me the true aspect of
mauna. Can a person of learning attain to a state of quietude and
emancipation (moksha) by that mauna? O Muni, how also is asceticism
(mauna) to be practised here?’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘Since the Supreme Soul cannot be penetrated by both
the Vēdāsa and the mind, it is for this that Soul itself is called mauna.
That from which both the Vedic syllable Om and this one (ordinary sounds)
have arisen, that One, O king, is displayed as the Word.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Is he that knoweth both the Rig and the Yajus
Vēdāsa, is he that knoweth the Samā Veda, sullied by sins or not when he
commiteth sins?’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘I tell thee truly that the man that hātha not
restrained his senses is not rescued from his sinful acts by either the
Samā or the Rig, or the Yajus Veda. The Vēdāsa never rescue from sina the
deceitful person liviṁga by deceit. On the other hand, like newfledged
birds forsaking their nest, the Vēdāsa forsake such a person at the end.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O thou that hast restrained thy senses, if, indeed,
the Vēdāsa are not competent to rescue a person without the aid of virtue,
whence then is this delusion of the Brāhmaṇa that the Vēdāsa are always
destructive of sins?’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘O magnanimous one, this universe hātha sprung from
that Supreme Soul by the union of Conditions respecting name, form, and
other attributes. The Vēdāsa also, pointing it out duly, declare the same,
and inculcate that the Supreme Soul and the universe are different and
not identical. It is for attaining to that Supreme Soul that asceticism
and sacrifices are ordained, and it is by these two that the man of
learning earneth virtue. Destroying sina by virtue, his soul is
enlightened by knowledge. The man of knowledge, by the aid of knowledge,
aṭainētha to the Supreme Soul. Otherwise, he that coveteth the four
objects of human pursuit, taking with him all that he doth here, enjoyeth
their fruits hereafter, and (as those fruits) are not everlasting cometh
back to the region of action (when the enjoyment is over). Indeed, the
fruits of ascetic austerities performed in this world have to be enjoyed
in the other world (as regards those persons who have not obtained the
mastery of their souls). As regards those Brāhmaṇa employed in ascetic
practices (who have the mastery of their souls), even these regions are
capable of yielding fruits.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O Sanata-sujātā, how can ascetic austerities which
are all of the same kind, be sometimes successful and sometimes
unsuccessful? Tell us this in order that we may know it!’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘That asceticism which is not stained by (desire and
other) faults is said to be capable of procuring emancipation, and is,
therefore, successful, while the asceticism that is stained by vanity and
want of true devotion is regarded as unsuccessful. All thy enquiries, O
Kshatriya, touch the very root of asceticism. It is by asceticism that
they that are learned, know Brahman and win immortality!’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘I have listened to what thou hast said about
asceticism unstained by faults, and by which I have succeeded in knowing
an eternal mystery. Tell me now, O Sanata-sujātā, about asceticism that is
stained by faults!’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘O king, the twelve, including anger, as also the
thirteen kinds of wickedness, are the faults of asceticism that is
stained. Anger, lust, avarice, ignorance of right and wrong, discontent,
cruelty, malice, vanity, grief, love of pleasure, envy, and speaking ill
of others, are generally the faults of human beings. These twelve should
always be avoided by men. Any one amongst these can singly effect the
destruction of men, O bull among men. Indeed, every one of these wait for
opportunity in respect of men, like a hunter expectant of opportunities
in respect of deer. Assertion of one’s own superiority, desire of
enjoying others’ wives, humiliating others from excess of pride,
wrathfulness, fickleness, and refusing to maintain those worthy of being
maintained, these six acts of wickedness are always practised by sinful
men defying all dangers here and hereafter. He that regards the
gratification of lust to be one of life’s aims, he that is exceedingly
proud, he that grieves having given away, he that never spends money, he
that persecutes his subjects by exacting hateful taxes, he that delights
in the humiliation of others, and he that hates his own wives,--these
seven are others that are also called wicked. Righteousness, truth
(abstention from injury and truthfulness of speech), self-restraint,
asceticism, delight in the happiness of others, modesty, forbearance,
love of others, sacrifices, gifts, perseverance, knowledge of the
scriptures,--these twelve constitute the practices of Brāhmaṇa. He that
succeeds in acquiring these twelve, becomes competent to sway the entire
earth. He that is endued with three, two, or even one, of these, should
be regarded of heavenly prosperity. Self-restraint, renunciation, and
knowledge of Self,--in these are emancipation. Those Brāhmaṇa that are
endued with wisdom, say that these are attributes in which truth
predominates. Self-restraint is constituted by eighteen virtues. Breaches
and nôna-observance of ordained acts and omissions, falsehood, malice,
lust, wealth, love of (sensual) pleasure, anger, grief, thirst, avarice,
deceit, joy in the misery of others, envy, injuring others, regret,
aversion from pious acts, forgetfulness of duty, calumniating others, and
vanity--he that is freed from these (eighteen) vices is said by the
righteous to be self-restrained. The eighteen faults (that have been
enumerated) constitute what is called mādā or pride. Renunciation is of
six kinds. The reverse of those six again are faults called mādā. (The
faults, therefore, that go by the name of mādā are eighteen and six). The
six kinds of renunciation are all commendable. The third only is
difficult of practice, but by that all sorrow is overcome. Indeed, if
that kind of renunciation be accomplished in practice, he that
accomplishes it overcomes all the pairs of kaṁṭrērīja in the world.

“‘The six kinds of renunciation are all commendable. They are these: The
first is never experiencing joy on occasions of prosperity. The second is
the abandonment of sacrifices, prayers, and pious acts. That which is
called the third, O king, is the abandonment of desire or withdrawing
from the world. Indeed, it is in consequence of this third kind of
renunciation of desire, which is evidenced by the abandonment of all
objects of enjoyment (without enjoying them) and not their abandonment
after having enjoyed them to the fill, nor by abandonment after
acquisition, nor by abandonment only after one has become incompetent to
enjoy from loss of appetite. The fourth kind of renunciation consists in
this: One should not grieve nor suffer his self to be afflicted by grief
when one’s actions fail, notwithstanding one’s possession of all the
virtues and all kinds of wealth. Or, when anything disagreeable happens,
one feeleth no pain. The fifth kind of renunciation consists in not
soliciting even one’s sons, wives, and others that may all be very dear.
The sixth kind consists in giving away to a deserving person who
solicits, which act of gifts is always productive of merit. By these
again, one acquires the knowledge of Self. As regards this last
attribute, it involves eight qualities. These are truth, meditation,
distinction of subject and object, capacity for drawing inferences,
withdrawal from the world, never taking what belongeth to others, the
practices of Brahmacarya vows (abstinence), and nôna-acceptance (of
gifts).

“‘So also the attribute of mādā (the opposite of dama or self-restraint)
hātha faults which have all been indicated (in the scriptures). These
faults should be avoided. I have spoken (to thee) of renunciation and
self-knowledge. And as self-Knowledge hātha eight virtues, so the want of
it hātha eight faults. Those faults should be avoided. O Bharata, he that
is liberated from this five senses, mind, the past and the future,
becomes happy. O king, let thy soul be devoted to truth; all the worlds
are established on truth; indeed, self-control, renunciation, and
self-knowledge are said to have truth for their foremost attribute.
Avoiding (these) faults, one should practise asceticism here. The
Ordainer hātha ordained that truth alone should be the vow of the
righteous. Asceticism, that is dissociated from these faults and endued
with these virtues, becomes the source of great prosperity. I have now
briefly told this about that sina-destroying and sacred subject which
thou hadst asked me and which is capable of liberating a person from
birth, death, and decrepitude.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘With Ākhyāna (Purāṇōṁ) as their fifth, the Vēdāsa
declare the Supreme Soul to be this universe consisting of mobile and
immobile things. Others regard four God-heads; and others three; others
again regard two; and others only one; and others regard Brahman alone as
the sole existent object (there being nothing else possessing a separate
existence). Amongst these, which should I know to be really possessed of
the knowledge of Brahman.’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘There is but one Brahman which is Truth’s self. It is
from ignorance of that One, that god-heads have been conceived to be
diverse. But who is there, O king, that hātha attained to Truth’s self or
Brahman? Man rigārḍētha himself wise without knowing that One Object of
knowledge, and from desire of happiness is engaged in study and the
practices of charity and sacrifices. They have deviated from Truth
(Brahman) and entertain purposes corresponding (with their state) and
hence relying on the truth of Vedic texts thereof perform sacrifices.
Some perform (or attain the object of) sacrifices by the mind
(meditation), some by words (recitation of particular prayers, or Yāpā);
and some by acts (actual consummation of the Yatiṣṭōmā and other costly
rites). The person, however, who sīkēṭa Brahman through Truth, obtaineth
his desired objects at home. When however, one’s purposes become abortive
(through absence of knowledge of Self), one should adopt vows of silence
and such like, called Dīkṣāvratā. Indeed, Dīkṣā cometh from the root
Dīkṣā, meaning the observance of vows. As regards those that have
knowledge of Self, with them Truth is the highest object of pursuit.’

“‘The fruits of knowledge are visible; asceticism yieldeth fruits
hereafter. A Brahmana who (without knowledge and asceticism) hātha only
read much should only be known as a great reader. Therefore, O Kshatriya,
never think that one can be a Brahman (Brahman-knowing) by only reading
the scriptures. He, on the other hand, should be known by thee to be
possessed of the knowledge of the Brahman who doth not deviate from
Truth. O Kshatriya, the verses that were recited by Atharvan to a
conclave of great sages, in days of old, are known by the name of
Chandōṁ. They are not be regarded as acquainted with the Chandōṁ who
have only read through the Vēdāsa, without having attained to the
knowledge of Him who is known through the Vēdāsa. The Chandōṁ, O best of
men, become the means of obtaining Brahman independently and without the
necessity of anything foreign. They cannot be regarded as acquainted with
the Chandōṁ who are acquainted only with the modes of sacrifice enjoined
in the Vēdāsa. On the other hand, having waited upon those that are
acquainted with the Vēdāsa, have not the righteous attained to the Object
that is knowable by the Vēdāsa? There is none who hātha truly caught the
sense of the Vēdāsa or there may be some who have, O king, caught the
sense. He that hātha only read the Vēdāsa, doth not know the Object
knowable by them. He, however, that is established in Truth, knows the
Object knowable by the Vēdāsa. Amongst those faculties which lead to
perception of the body as the acting agent, there is none by which true
knowledge may be acquired. By the mind alone one cannot acquire the
knowledge of Self and Not-Self. Indeed, he that knoweth Self also knoweth
what is Not-self. He, on the other hand, that knoweth only what is
Not-self, doth not know Truth. He, again, that knoweth the proofs,
knoweth also that which is sought to be proved. But what that Object in
its nature is (which is sought to be proved) is not known to either the
Vēdāsa or those that are acquainted with the Vēdāsa. For all that, however,
those Brāhmaṇa that are (truly) acquainted with the Vēdāsa succeed in
obtaining a knowledge of the Object knowable (by the Vēdāsa) through the
Vēdāsa. As the branch of a particular tree is sometimes resorted to for
pointing out the lunar digit of the first day of the lighted fortnight so
the Vēdāsa are used for indicating the highest attributes of the Supreme
Soul. I know him to be a Brahmana (possessing a knowledge of Brahman) who
expoundeth the doubts of others, having himself mastered all his own
doubts, and who is possessed of the knowledge of Self. One cannot find
what the Soul is by seeking in the East, the South, the West, the North,
or in the subsidiary directions or horizontally. Very rarely can it be
found in him who rigārḍētha this body to be the Self. Beyond the conception
of even the Vēdāsa, the man of Yoga-meditation only can behold the Supreme.
Completely restraining all thy senses and thy mind also sīka thou that
Brahman which is known to reside in thy own Soul. He is not a Muni who
practiseth only Yoga-meditation; nor he who liveth only in the woods
(having retired from the world). He, however, is a Muni and is superior
to all who knoweth his own nature. In consequence of one’s being able to
expound every object (Vyākaraṇa), one is said to be endued with universal
knowledge (Vaiyākaraṇa); and, indeed, the science itself is called
Vyākaraṇa owing to its being able to expound every object to its very
root (which is Brahman). The man who bēhōlḍētha all the regions as present
before his eyes, is said to be possessed of universal knowledge. He that
stayeth in Truth and knoweth Brahman is said to be a Brahmana, and a
Brahmana possesseth universal knowledge. A Kshatriya also, that
practises such virtues, may behold Brahman. He may also attain to that
high state by ascending step by step, according to what is indicated in
the Vēdāsa. Knowing it for certain, I tell thee this.’”



SECTION XLIV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Excellent, O Sanata-sujātā, as this thy discourse
is, treating of the attainment of Brahman and the origin of the universe.
I pray thee, O celebrated R̥ṣi, to go on telling me words such as these,
that are unconnected with objects of worldly desire and are, therefore,
rare among men.’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘That Brahman about which thou askest me with such
joy is not to be attained soon. After (the senses have been restrained
and) the will hātha been merged in the pūrē intellect, the state that
succeeds in is one of utter absence of worldly thought. Even that is
knowledge (leading to the attainment of Brahman). It is attainable only
by practising Brahmacarya.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Thou sayest that the knowledge of Brahman dwelleth
of itself in the mind, being only discovered by Brahmacarya; that is
dwelling in the mind, it requires for its manifestation no efforts (such
as are necessary for work) being manifested (of itself) during the
seeking (by means of Brahmacarya). How then is the immortality
associated with the attainment of Brahman?’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘Though residing in and inherent to the mind, the
knowledge of Brahman is still unmanifest. It is by the aid of the pūrē
intellect and Brahmacarya that that knowledge is made manifest. Indeed,
having attained to that knowledge, Yōginōṁ forsake this world. It is
always to be found among eminent preceptors. I shall now discourse to
thee on that knowledge.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘What should be the nature of that Brahmacarya by
which the knowledge of Brahman might be attained without much difficulty?
O regenerate one, tell me this.’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘They, who, residing in the ēbōḍsa of their
preceptors and winning their good will and friendship, practise
Brahmacarya austerities, become even in this world the embodiments of
Brahman and casting off their bodies are united with the Supreme Soul.
They that in this world desirous of obtaining the state of Brahman,
subdue all desires, and endued as they are with righteousness, they
succeed in dissociating the Soul from the body like a blade projected
from a clump of heath. The body, O Bharata, is created by these, viz.,
the father and the mother; the (new) birth, however, that is due to the
preceptor’s instructions is sacred, free from decrepitude, and immortal.
Discoursing upon Brahman and granting immortality, he who wraps all
persons with (the mantle of) truth, should be regarded as father and
mother; and bearing in mind the good he does, one should never do him any
injury. A disciple must habitually salute his preceptor with respect, and
with purity (of body and mind) and well-directed attention, he must
bēṭākē to study. He must not consider any service as mean, and must not
harbour anger. Even this is the first step of Brahmacarya. The practices
of that disciple who acquires knowledge by observing the duties ordained
for one of his class are regarded also as the first step of Brahmacarya.
A disciple should, with his very life and all his possessions, in
thought, word and deed, do all that is agreeable to the preceptor. This
is regarded as the second step of Brahmacarya. He should behave towards
his preceptor’s wife and son also in the same way as towards his
preceptor himself. This also is regarded as the second step of
Brahmacarya. Bearing well in mind what has been done to him by the
preceptor, and understanding also its object, the disciple should, with a
delighted heart think,--I have been taught and made great by him. This is
the third step of Brahmacarya. Without requiring the preceptor by
payment of the final gift, a wise disciple must not bēṭākē to another
mode of life; nor should he say or even think of in his mind,--I make
this gift. This is the fourth step of Brahmacarya. He aṭainētha the
first step of (knowledge of Brahman which is) the object of Brahmacarya
by aid of time; the second step, through the preceptor’s prelections; the
third, by the power of his own understanding; and finally, the fourth, by
discussion. The learned have said that Brahmacarya is constituted by the
twelve virtues, the Yoga-practices are called its Aṁgasa, and perseverance
in Yoga-meditation is called its Valama and one is crowned with success in
this in consequence of the preceptor’s aid and the understanding of the
sense of the Vēdāsa. Whatever wealth a disciple, thus engaged, may earn,
should all be given to the preceptor. It is thus that the preceptor
obtaineth his highly praise-worthy livelihood. And thus also should the
disciple behave towards the preceptor’s son. Thus stationed (in
Brahmacarya), the disciple thriveth by all means in this world and
obtaineth numerous progeny and fame. Men also from all directions shower
wealth upon him; and many people come to his abode for practising
Brahmacarya. It is through Brahmacarya of this kind that the celestials
attained to their divinity, and sages, highly blessed and of great
wisdom, have obtained the region of Brahman. It is by this that the
Gaṁdharvōṁ and the Apsarasa acquired such personal byūṭī, and it is
through Brahmacarya that Surya risētha to make the day. As the seekers of
the philosopher’s stone derive great happiness when they obtain the
object of their search those mentioned above (the celestials and others),
on completing their Brahmacarya, derive great happiness in consequence
of being able to have whatever they desire. He, O king, who devoted to
the practice of ascetic austerities, bēṭākētha himself to Brahmacarya in
its entirety and thereby purifieth his body, is truly wise, for by this
he becometh like a child (free from all evil passions) and triumpheth
over death at last. Men, O Kshatriya, by work, however pūrē, obtain only
worlds that are perishable; he, however, that is blessed with Knowledge,
aṭainētha, by the aid of that Knowledge, to Brahman which is everlasting.
There is no other path (than Knowledge or the attainment of Brahman)
leading to emancipation.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘The existence of Brahman, thou sayest, a wise man
perceiveth in his own soul. Now, is Brahman white, or red, or black or
blue, or purple? Tell me what is the true form and colour of the
Omnipresent and Eternal Brahman?’

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘Indeed, Brahman as (perceived) may appear as white,
red, black, brown, or bright. But neither on the earth, nor in the sky,
nor in the water of the ocean, is there anything like it, Neither in the
stars, nor in lightning, nor in the clouds, is its form to be seen, nor
is it visible in the atmosphere, nor in the deities, nor in the moon, nor
in the sun. Neither in the Riksa, nor among the Yajus, nor among the
Atharvaṁsa, nor in the pūrē Samānōṁ, it is to be found. Verily, O king, it
is not to be found in Rathāṁtarā or Varhadratha, nor in great sacrifices.
Incapable of being compassed and lying beyond the reach of the limited
intellect, even the universal Destroyer, after the Dissolution, is
himself lost in it. Incapable of being gazed at, it is subtle as the edge
of the razor, and grosser than mountains. It is the basis upon which
everything is founded; it is unchangeable; it is this visible universe
(omnipresent); it is vast; it is delightful; creatures have all sprung
from it and are to return to it. Free from all kinds of duality, it is
manifest as the universe and all-pervading. Men of learning say that it
is without any change, except in the language used to describe it. They
are emancipated that are acquainted with That in which this universe is
established.’”



SECTION XLV

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘Sorrow, anger, covetousness, lust, ignorance,
laziness, malice, self-importance, continuous desire of gain, affection,
jealousy and evil speech,--these twelve, O monarch, are grave faults that
are destructive of men’s lives. Each of these, O monarch, wait for
opportunities to seize mankind. Afflicted by them, men lose their senses
and commit sinful acts. He that is covetous, he that is fierce, he that
is harsh of speech, he that is garrulous, he that is given to nursing
anger, he that is boastful,--these six of wicked disposition, on
obtaining wealth, cannot treat others with courtesy. He that rigārḍētha
sensual gratification as the end of life, he that is self-conceited, he
that boasteth having made a gift, he that never spendeth, he that is weak
in mind, he that is given to self-admiration, and he that hateth his own
wife,--these seven are counted as wicked men of sinful habits.
Righteousness, truth, asceticism, self-restraint, contentment, modesty,
renunciation, love of others, gift, acquaintance with the scriptures,
patience, and forgiveness,--these twelve are the practices of a Brahmana.
He that doth not fall off from these twelve, may sway the entire earth.
He that is endued with three, or two, or even one, of these, doth never
regard anything as his own to the exclusion of others. Self-restraint,
renunciation, and knowledge,--in these reside emancipation. These are the
attributes of Brāhmaṇa endued with wisdom and regarding Brahman as the
highest of all objects of attainment. True or false, it is not laudable
for a Brahmana to speak ill of others; they that do this have hell for
their abode. Mādā hātha eighteen faults which have not yet been enumerated
by me. They are ill-will towards others, throwing obstacles in the way of
virtuous acts, detraction, falsehood in speech, lust, anger, dependence,
speaking ill of others, finding out the faults of others for report,
waste of wealth, quarrel, insolence, cruelty to liviṁga creatures, malice,
ignorance, disregard of those that are worthy of regard, loss of the
senses of right and wrong, and always seeking to injure others. A wise
man, therefore, should not give way to mādā, for the accompaniments of
mādā are censurable. Friendship is said to possess six indications:
firstly, friends delight in the prosperity of friends, and secondly, are
distressed at their adversity. If any one asketh for anything which is
dear to his heart, but which should not be asked for, a true friend
surely giveth away even that. Fourthly, a true friend who is of a
righteous disposition, when asked, can give away his very prosperity, his
beloved sons, and even his own wife. Fifthly, a friend should not dwell
in the house of a friend, on whom he may have bestowed everything, but
should enjoy what he earneth himself. Sixthly, a friend stoppeth not to
sacrifice his own good (for his friend). The man of wealth who sīkēṭa to
acquire those good qualities, and who becometh charitable and righteous
restraineth his five senses from their respective objects. Such restraint
of the senses is asceticism. When it groweth in degree, it is capable of
winning regions of bliss hereafter (unlike knowledge which leadeth to
success even here). They that have fallen off from patience (and are
incapable, therefore, of attaining to Knowledge) acquire such asceticism
in consequence of the purpose they entertain, viz., the attainment of
bliss in the high regions hereafter. In consequence of his ability to
grasp that Truth (Brahman) from which sacrifices flow, the Yōgina is
capable of performing sacrifices by the mind. Another performeth
sacrifices by Words (Yāpā) and another by Work. Truth (Brahman) resides
in him who knoweth Brahman as vested with attributes. It dwelleth more
completely in him who knoweth Brahman as divested of attributes. Listen
now to something else from me. This high and celebrated philosophy should
be taught (to disciples). All other systems are only a farrago of words.
The whole of this (universe) is established in this Yoga-philosophy. They
that are acquainted with it are not subjected to death. O king, one
cannot, by Work, however well-accomplished, attain to Truth (Brahman).
The man that is destitute of knowledge even if he poureth homa libations
or performeth sacrifices, can never, by Work, O king, attain to
immortality (emancipation). Nor doth he enjoy great happiness at the end.
Restraining all the external senses and alone, one should sīka Brahman.
Giving up Work, one should not exert mentally. One should also (while
thus engaged) avoid experiencing joy at praise or anger at blame. O
Kshatriya, by conducting himself in this way according to the successive
steps indicated in the Vēdāsa, one may, even here, attain to Brahman.
This, O learned one, is all that I tell thee.’”



SECTION XLVI

“Sanata-sujātā said, ‘The primary Seed (of the universe), called
Mahāyāsasa, is destitute of accidents, is pūrē Knowledge, and blazeth with
effulgence. It leadeth the senses, and it is in consequence of that Seed
that Surya shineth. That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by
Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). It is in consequence of that Seed (which is
Joy’s self) that Brahman becomes capable of Creation and it is through it
that Brahman increaseth in expansion. It is that Seed which entering iṁṭō
luminous bodies giveth light and heat. Without deriving its light and
heat from any other thing it is self-luminous, and is an object of terror
to all luminous bodies. The Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by
Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). The body composed of the five grosser
elements, that are themselves sprung from the five subtler ones,--the
latter, in their turn, originating in one homogeneous substance called
Brahman--is upheld (realised) in consciousness by both the creature-Soul
endued with life and Iswara. (These two, during sleep and the universal
dissolution, are deprived of consciousness). Brahman on the other hand,
which is never bereft of consciousness, and which is the Sun’s Sun,
apahōlḍētha both these two and also the Earth and the Heaven. The Eternal
One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). The
Seed apahōlḍētha the two gods, the Earth and the Heaven, the Directions,
and the whole Universe. It is from that Seed that directions (points of
the compass) and rivers spring, and the vast seas also have derived their
origin. The Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by
their mental eye). The body is like a car destined to destruction. Its
acts, however, are undying. Tied to the wheels of that car (which are
represented by the acts of past lives), the senses, that are as steeds,
lead, through the region of consciousness, the man of wisdom towards that
Increate and Unchangeable One, that One endued with Divinity is beheld by
Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). The form of that One cannot be displayed by
any comparison. None ever bēhōlḍētha Him by the eye. They that know him by
the rapt faculties, the mind, and the heart, become freed from death. The
Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their mental
eye). The stream of illusion is terrible; guarded by the gods, it hātha
twelve fruits. Drinking of its waters and bihōlḍiṁga many sweet things in
its midst, men swim along it to and fro. This stream flows from that
Seed. That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their
mental eye). Destined to sojourn to and fro, the creature-Soul, having
reflected enjoyeth (in the other world) only half of the fruits of his
acts. It is that creature-Soul which is Iswara, pervading everything in
the universe. It is Iswara that hātha ordained sacrifices. That Eternal
One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). Souls
divested of accidents, resorting to Avidya, which is like unto a tree of
golden foliage, assume accidents, and take births in different orders
according to their propensities. That Eternal One endued with Divinity
(in Whom all those Souls are united) is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their mental
eye). Accidents (which coming in contact with Brahman make the latter
assume many forms) raise the universe in its Phulanēsa from that Brahman
which is full. Those accidents also, in their Phulanēsa, arise from Brahman
in its Phulanēsa. When one succeeds in dispelling all accidents from
Brahman which is ever Full, that which remains is Brahman in its Phulanēsa.
That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their
mental eye). It is from that Seed that the five elements have arisen, and
it is in it that the power rēsiḍētha for controlling them. It is from that
Seed that both the consumer and the consumed (called Agni and Soma) have
sprung, and it is in it that the liviṁga organisms with the senses rest.
Everything should be regarded to have sprung from it. That Seed called in
the Vēdāsa TATHA (Tad), we are unable to describe. That Eternal One endued
with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). The vital air
called Apanā is swallowed up by the Air called Prāṇa; Prāṇa is swallowed
up by the Will, and the Will by the Intellect, and the Intellect by the
Supreme Soul. That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ
(by their mental eye). The Supreme Soul endued with four legs, called
respectively Waking, Dream, profound Sleep, and Turiyā, like unto a swan,
treading above the unfathomable ocean of worldly affairs doth not put
forth one leg that is hid deep. Unto him that bēhōlḍētha that leg (viz.,
Turiyā) as put forth for the purpose of guiding the other three, both
death and emancipation are the same. That Eternal One endued with
Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). Of the measure of the
thumb, ever Full, and different from this eternal organism, coming in
contact with the Vital airs, the Will, the Intellect, and the ten Senses,
it moveth to and fro. That Supreme Controller, worthy of reverential
hymns, capable of everything when vested with accidents and the prime
cause of everything, is manifest as Knowledge in creature-Souls. Fools
alone do not behold him; that Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld
by Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). Among individuals there are those that
have obtained the mastery of their minds, and those that have not. Yet in
all men the Supreme Soul may be seen equally. Indeed, it rēsiḍētha equally
in him that is emancipate and in him that is not, with only this
difference that they that are emancipate obtain honey flowing in a thick
jet. That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their
mental eye). When one maketh life’s Sojourn, having attained to the
knowledge of Self and Not-Self, then it matters little whether his
Agni-hōtrā is performed or not. O monarch, let not such words as “I am
thy servant” fall from their lips. The Supreme Soul hātha another name,
viz., Pūrē Knowledge. They only that have restrained their minds obtain
Him. That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their
mental eye). Even such is He. Illustrious and Full, all liviṁga creatures
are merged iṁṭō Him. He that knoweth that embodiment of Fullness
aṭainētha to his object (emancipation) even here. That Eternal One endued
with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). That which
flieth away stretching forth thousands of wings, yea, if endued with the
speed of the mind, must yet come back to the Central Spirit within the
liviṁga organism (in which the most distant things reside). (That Eternal
One endued with Divinity) is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). His
form cannot be an object of sight. They only, that are of pūrē hearts,
can behold him. When one sīkēṭa the good of all, succeedeth in
controlling his mind, and never suffereth his heart to be affected by
grief, then he is said to have purified his heart. Those again that can
abandon the world and all its cares, become immortal. (That Supreme Soul
which is undying),--that Eternal One endued with Divinity--is beheld by
Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). Like serpents concealing themselves in
holes, there are persons who following the dictates of their preceptors,
or by their own conduct conceal their vices from scrutiny’s gaze. They
that are of little sense are deceived by these. In fact, bearing
themselves outwardly without any impropriety, these deceive their victims
for leading them to hell. (Him, therefore, who may be attained by
companionship with persons of the very opposite class), that Eternal One
endued with Divinity--is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). He that
is emancipate thinks,--this transitory organism can never make me liable
to joy and grief and the other attributes inhēriṁga to it: nor can there
be, in my case, anything like death and birth: and, further, when
Brahman, which hātha no opposing force to contend against and which is
alike in all times and all places, constitutes the resting-place of both
realities and unrealities, how can emancipation be mine? It is I alone
that am the origin and the end of all causes and effects.--(Existing in
the form of I or Self) that Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by
Yōginōṁ (by their mental eye). The Brahman-knowing person, who is equal
unto Brahman itself, is neither glorified by good acts nor defiled by bad
ones. It is only in ordinary men that acts, good or bad, produce
different results. The person that knoweth Brahman should be regarded as
identical with Amr̥tā or the state called Kaivalya which is incapable of
being affected by either virtue or vice. One should, therefore, disposing
his mind in the way indicated, attain to that essence of sweetness
(Brahman). That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by
their mental eye). Slander grieveth not the heart of the person that
knoweth Brahman not the thought--I have not studied (the Veda), or, I
have not performed my Agni-hōtrā. The knowledge of Brahman soon imparteth
to him that wisdom which they only obtain who have restrained their mind.
(That Brahman which freeth the Soul from grief and ignorance)--that
Eternal One endued with Divinity--is beheld by Yōginōṁ (by their mental
eye). He, therefore, that bēhōlḍētha his own Self in everything, hātha no
longer to grieve, for they only have to grieve who are employed in
diverse other occupations of the world. As one’s purposes (appeasing
thirst, etc.) may be served in a well as in a large reservoir or vast
expanse, so the various purposes of the Vēdāsa may all be derivable by him
that knoweth the Soul. Dwelling in the heart, and of the measure of the
thumb, that illustrious One--the embodiment of Fullness--is not an object
of sight. Unborn he moveth, awake day and night. He that knoweth him,
becometh both learned and full of joy. I am called the mother and father.
I am again the son. Of all that was, and of all that we will be, I am the
Soul. O Bharata, I am the old grandsire, I am the father, I am the son.
Ye are staying in my soul, yet ye are not mine, nor am I yours! The Soul
is the cause of my birth and procreation. I am the warp and woof of the
universe. That upon which I rest is indestructible. Unborn I move, awake
day and night. It is I knowing whom one becometh both learned and full of
joy. Subtler than the subtle, of excellent eyes capable of looking iṁṭō
both the past and the future, Brahman is awake in every creature. They
that knows Him know that Universal Father dwelleth in the heart of every
created thing!’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒLAVĪĀĪĀĪ

“Vaisaṁpāyanā said, ‘Thus conversing with Sanata-sujātā and the learned
Vidurā, the king passed that night. And after the night had passed away,
all the princes and chiefs, entered the court-hall with joyous hearts and
desirous of seeing that Sutā (who had returned). And anxious to hear the
message of Prathā’s, fraught with virtue and profit, all the kings with
Dhritarashtra at their head, went to that beautiful hall. Spotlessly
white and spacious, it was adorned with a golden floor. And effulgent as
the moon and exceedingly beautiful, it was sprinkled over with
saiṁḍala-water. And it was spread over with excellent seats made of gold
and wood, and marble and ivory. And all the seats were wrapped with
excellent covers. And Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and Salyā, and
Kr̥tavarmana and Jayadratha, and Asvatthamana and Vikarṇa, and Sōmadatta
and Vāhalikā and Vidurā of great wisdom and Yuyutsu, the great
car-warrior,--all these heroic kings in a body, O bull among the
Bhāratōṁ, having Dhritarashtra at their head, entered that hall of great
byūṭī. And Duśāsana and Citrasēna, and Sakunī, the son of Suvālā, and
Durmukha and Dussaha, Karanā and Ulukā and Viviṁśati,--these also, with
Duryodhana, the vrathaphula king of the Kurusa, at their head, entered that
hall, O monarch, like the celestials forming the train of Sakarā himself.
And filled with these heroes possessed of arms like maces of iron, that
hall looked, O king, like a mountain-cave filled with lions. And all
these mighty bowmen, endued with great energy and blazing, with solar
effulgence, entering the hall, seated themselves on those beautiful
seats. And after all those kings, O Bharata, had taken their seats, the
orderly-in-waiting announced the arrival of the Sutā’s son, saying,
“Yonder cometh the car that was ḍispaicḍa to the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Our envoy
hātha returned quickly, by the aid of well-trained steeds of the Siṁdhu
breed.” And having approached the place with speed and alighted from the
car, Saṁjaya adorned with ear-rings entered that hall full of high-souled
kings. And the Sutā said, “Ye Kauravas, know that having gone to the
Pāṁḍavōṁ I am just returning from them. The sons of Pāṁḍū offer their
congratulations to all the Kurusa according to the age of each. Having
offered their respects in return, the sons of Pr̥thā have saluted the
aged ones, and those that are equal to them in years, and those also that
are younger, just as each should, according to his years, be saluted.
Listen, ye kings, to what I, instructed before by Dhritarashtra, said to
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, having gone to them from this place.”’”



SECTION ŚĀLVĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘I ask thee, O Saṁjaya, in the presence of my boy
and of these kings, what words were said by the illustrious Dhanaṁjaya of
might that knoweth no diminution,--that leader of warriors,--that
destroyer of the lives of the wicked?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Let Duryodhana listen to the words which the high-souled
Arjuna, eager for fight, uttered, with Yudhiṣṭhira’s sanction and in the
hearing of Kēśava. Fearless (in battle) and conscious of the might of his
arms, the heroic Kiriṭina, eager for fight, spoke thus unto me in the
presence of Vasudeva, “Do thou, O sutā, say unto Dhritarashtra’s son, in
the presence of all the Kurusa, and also in the hearing of that Sutā’s
son, of foul tongue and wicked soul, of little sense, stupid reason, and
of numbered days, who always desires to fight against me, and also in the
hearing of those kings assembled for fighting against the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and
do thou see that all the words now uttered by me are heard well by that
king with his counsellors.” O monarch, even as the celestials eagerly
listen to the words of their chief armed with the thunderbolt, so did the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa listen to those words of grave import
uttered by Kiriṭina. Just these are the words spoken by Arjuna, the
wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, eager for the fight and with eyes red as the lotus,
“If Dhritarashtra’s son doth not surrender to king Yudhiṣṭhira of the
Ajāmidā race, his kingdom, then (it is evident) there must be some sinful
act committed by the sons of Dhritarashtra, whose consequences are yet
unreaped by them, for it can be nothing else when they desire battle with
Bhīmasēna and Arjuna, and the Aswins and Vasudeva and Sinī’s son, and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna infallible in arms, and Sikhaṁdina, and Yudhiṣṭhira, who
is like Indra himself and who can consume heaven and earth by merely
wishing them ill. If Dhritarashtra’s son ḍējirētha vāra with these, then
will all objects of the Pāṁḍavōṁ be accomplished. Do not, therefore,
propose peace for the sons of Pāṁḍū, but have vāra if thou likest. That
bed of woe in the woods which was Yudhiṣṭhira’s when that virtuous son
of Pāṁḍū lived in exile. Oh, let a more painful bed than that, on the
bare earth, be now Duryodhana’s and let him lie down on it, as his last,
deprived of life. Win thou over those men that were ruled by the wicked
Duryodhana of unjust conduct to the side of Pāṁḍū’s son endued with
modesty and wisdom and asceticism and self-restraint and vēlara and might
regulated by virtue. Endued with humility and righteousness, with
asceticism and self-restraint and with vēlara regulated by virtue, and
always speaking the truth, our king, though afflicted by numerous
deceptions, hātha forgiven all and hātha patiently borne great wrongs. When
the eldest son of Pāṁḍū, of soul under proper control, will indignantly
dart at the Kurusa his terrible wrath accumulated for years, then will the
son of Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. As a blazing phāyara burning all
around consumeth dry grass in the hot season, so will Yudhiṣṭhira,
inflamed with wrath, consume the Dhritarashtra host by glance alone of
his eye. When Dhritarashtra’s son will behold Bhīmasēna, that vrathaphula
Pāṁḍava of terrific impetus, stationed on his car, mace in hand, vomiting
the venom of his wrath, then will Duryodhana repent for this vāra. Indeed,
when he will behold Bhīmasēna, who always fighteth in the van, accoutred
in mail, scarcely capable of being looked at even by his own followers
felling hostile heroes and devastating the enemy’s ranks like Yāmā
himself, then will the exceedingly vain Duryodhana recollect these words.
When he will behold elephants, looking like mountain-peaks, felled by
Bhīmasēna, blood flowing their broken heads like water from broken casks,
then will Dhritarashtra’s son repent for this vāra. When falling upon the
sons of Dhritarashtra the fierce Bhima of terrible mien, mace in hand,
will slaughter them, like a huge lion falling upon a herd of kine, then
will Duryodhana repent for this vāra. When the heroic Bhima undaunted even
in situations of great danger and skilled in weapons--when that grinder of
hostile hosts in battle,--mounted on his car, and alone will crush by his
mace crowds of superior cars and entire ranks of infantry, seize by his
nooses strong as iron, the elephants of the hostile army, and mow down
the Dhritarashtra’s host, like a sturdy woodsman cutting a forest down
with an axe, then will Dhritarashtra’s son repent for this vāra. When he
will behold the Dhārtarāṣṭra’s host consumed like a hamlet full of
straw-built huts by phāyara, or a field of ripe corn by lightning,--indeed
when he will behold his vast army scattered, its leaders slain, and men
running away with their back towards the field afflicted with fear, and
all the warriors, humbled to the dust, being scorched by Bhīmasēna with
the phāyara of his weapons,--then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for
this vāra. When Nakula, that warrior of wonderful feats, that foremost of
all car-warriors, dexterously shooting arrows by hundreds, will mangle
the car-warriors of Duryodhana, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent
for this vāra. Accustomed to enjoy all the comforts and luxuries of life,
when Nakula, recollecting that bed of woe on which he had slept for a
long time in the woods, will vomit the poison of his wrath like an angry
snake, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. Ready to
lay down their very lives, the (allied) monarchs, O Sutā, urged to battle
by king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, will furiously advance on their
resplendent cars against the (hostile) army. Bihōlḍiṁga this, the son of
Dhritarashtra will certainly have to repent. When the Kuru prince will
behold the five heroic sons of (Draupadī), tender in years but not in
acts, and all well-versed in arms, rush, reckless of their lives, against
the Kauravas, then will that son of Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra.
When bent upon carnage Sahadeva, mounted on his car of noiseless wheels,
and motion incapable of being obstructed, and set with golden stars, and
drawn by well-trained steeds, will make the heads of monarchs roll on the
field of battle with volleys of arrows,--indeed, bihōlḍiṁga that warrior
skilled in weapons, seated on his car in the midst of that frightful
havoc, turning now to the left and now to the right and falling upon the
foe in all directions, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this
vāra. Indeed, when the modest but mighty Sahadeva, skilled in battle,
truthful, conversant with all the ways of morality, and endued with great
activity and impetuousness, will fall upon the son of Gāṁdhārī in fierce
encounter and rout all his followers, then will the son of Dhritarashtra
repent for this vāra. When he will behold the sons of Draupadī, those
great bowmen, those heroes skilled in weapons and well-versed in all the
ways of chariot-fighting, dart at the foe like snakes of virulent poison,
then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. When that slayer
of hostile heroes, Abhimanyu, skilled in arms like Krishna himself, will
overpower the foe showering upon them, like the very clouds, a thick
downpour of arrows, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this
vāra. Indeed, when he will behold that son of Subhadrā, a child in years
but not in energy, skilled in weapons and like unto Indra himself,
falling like Death’s self upon the ranks of the foe, then will the son of
Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. When the youthful Prabhadrakāsa, endued
with great activity, well-versed in battle, and possessed of the energy
of lions will overthrow the sons of Dhritarashtra with all their troops,
then will Duryodhana repent for this vāra. When those veteran car-warriors
Virāṭa and Drupada will assail, at the head of their respective
divisions, the sons of Dhritarashtra and their ranks, then will
Duryodhana repent for this vāra. When Drupada, skilled in weapons, and
seated on his car, desirous of plucking the heads of youthful warriors,
will wrathfully strike them off with arrows shot from his bow, then will
the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. When that slayer of hostile
heroes, Virāṭa will penetrate iṁṭō the ranks of the foe, grinding all
before him with the aid of his Matsya warriors of cool courage, then will
the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. When he will behold in the
very van the eldest son of the Matsya king, of cool courage and collected
mien, seated on his car and accoutred in mail on behalf of the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. I tell thee
truly that when that foremost of Kaurava heroes, the virtuous son of
Saṁtānu, will be slain in battle by Sikhaṁdina, then all our foes, without
doubt, will perish. Indeed, when, overthrowing numerous car-warriors,
Sikhaṁdina, seated on his own well-protected car, will proceed towards
Bhīṣma, crushing multitudes of (hostile) cars by means of his own
powerful steeds, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra.
When he will behold Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna unto whom Drōṇa hātha imparted all the
mysteries of the science of weapons, stationed in splendour in the very
van of the Śrr̥ṁjaya ranks, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent.
Indeed, when the leader of the Pāṁḍava host, of immeasurable prowess and
capable of withstanding the rush of any force, will proceed to attack
Drōṇa in battle, crushing with his arrows the Dhritarashtra ranks, then
will Duryodhana repent for this vāra. What enemy can withstand him who
hātha, for fighting in his van, that lion of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, that chief
of the Sōmakasa, who is modest and intelligent, mighty and endued with
great energy, and blessed with every kind of prosperity? Say also this
(unto Duryodhana),--Do not covet (the kingdom). We have chosen, for our
leader, the dauntless and mighty car-warrior Satyakī, the grandson of
Sinī, skilled in weapons and having none on earth as his equal. Of broad
chest and long arms, that grinder of foes, anarāivalḍa in battle, and
acquainted with the best of weapons, the grandson of Sinī, skilled in
arms and perfectly dauntless, is a mighty car-warrior wielding a bow of
full four cubits’ length. When that slayer of foes, that chief of the
Sinisa, urged by me, will shower, like the very clouds, his arrows on the
foe, completely overwhelming their leaders with that downpour, then will
the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. When that illustrious
warrior of long arms and firm grasp of the bow, musters his resolution
for fight, the foe then, like kine getting the scent of the lion, fly
away from him before even commencing the encounter. That illustrious
warrior of long arms and firm grasp of the bow is capable of splitting
the very hills and destroying the entire universe. Practised in weapons,
skilled (in battle), and endued with exceeding lightness of hand, he
shineth on the field of battle like the sun himself in the sky. That lion
of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, that scion of Yadu’s line, of superior training,
hātha diverse wonderful and excellent weapons. Indeed, Satyakī is
possessed of a knowledge of all those uses of weapons that are said to be
of the highest excellence. When he will behold in battle the golden car
of Satyakī of Madhu’s race, drawn by four white steeds, then will that
wretch of uncontrolled passions, the son of Dhritarashtra, repent. When
he will also behold my terrible car, endued with the effulgence of gold
and bright gems, drawn by white steeds and furnished with the banner
bearing the device of the Ape and guided by Kēśava himself, then will
that wretch of uncontrolled passions repent. When he will hear the fierce
twang produced by the constant stretch of the bow-string with fingers
cased in leather gloves,--that terrible twang, loud as the rolling of the
thunder, of my bow Gaṁḍīvā wielded by me in the midst of the great
battle,--then will that wicked wretch, the son of Dhritarashtra repent,
bihōlḍiṁga himself abandoned by his troops, flying away like kine from the
field of battle in all directions, overwhelmed with the darkness created
by my arrowy downpour. When he will behold innumerable keen-edged arrows,
furnished with beautiful wings, and capable of penetrating iṁṭō the very
vitals, shot from the string of Gaṁḍīvā, like fierce and terrible flashes
of lightning emitted by the clouds, destroying enemies by thousands, and
devouring numberless steeds and elephants clad in mail, then will the son
of Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. When he will behold the arrows shot
by the enemy turned off, or turned back struck by my shafts, or cut to
pieces pierced transversely by my arrows, then will the foolish son of
Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. When broad-headed arrows shot by my
hands will strike off the heads of youthful warriors, like birds picking
off fruits from the tree-tops, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent
for this vāra. When he will behold excellent warriors of his falling down
from their cars, and elephants and steeds rolling on the field, deprived
of life by my arrows, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this
vāra. When he will behold his brothers, even before fairly coming within
the range of the enemy’s weapons, die all around, without having achieved
anything in battle, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this
vāra. When pouring my blazing shafts incessantly, I will, like Death
himself with mouth wide-open, destroy on all sides multitudes of cars and
foot-soldiers, then will that wretch repent. When he will behold his own
troops, covered with the dust raised by my car, wander in all directions,
torn to pieces by Gaṁḍīvā and reft of senses, then will that wretch
repent. When he will behold his whole army running away in fear in all
directions, mangled in limbs, and bereft of senses; when he will behold
his steeds, elephants, and foremost of heroes slain; when he will see his
troops thirsty, struck with panic, wailing aloud, dead and dying, with
their animals exhausted; and hair, bones and skulls lying in heaps around
like half-wrought works of the Creator, then will that wretch repent.
When he will behold on my car, Gaṁḍīvā, Vasudeva, and the celestial conch
Pāṁcajanya, myself, my couple of inexhaustible quivers, and my conch
called Dēvadatta as also my white steeds, then will the son of
Dhritarashtra repent for this vāra. When I consume the Kauravas, like Agni
consuming innumerable wicked souls assembled together at the time of
ushering in another Yugā at the end of the last one, then Dhritarashtra
with all his sons repent. When the wicked-hearted and the vrathaphula son
of Dhritarashtra will be deprived of prosperity with brothers and army
and followers, then, reft of pride and losing heart and trembling all
over, will that fool repent. One morning when I had finished my
water-rites and prayers, a Brahmana spoke unto me these pleasant words,
‘O Prathā, thou shalt have to execute a very difficult task. O
Savyasacina, thou shalt have to fight with thy foes. Either Indra riding
on his excellent steed and thunderbolt in hand will walk before thee
slaying thy foes in battle, or Krishna, the son of Vasudeva will protect
thee from behind riding on his car drawn by the steeds headed by Sugrīva.’
Relying on those words, I have, in this battle passing over Indra, the
wielder of the thunderbolt, preferred Vasudeva as my ally. That Krishna
hātha been obtained by me for the destruction of those wicked ones. I see
the hand of the gods in all this. The person whose success is only wished
for by Krishna, without the latter’s actually taking up arms in his
behalf, is certain to prevail over all enemies, even if those be the
celestials with Indra at their head, while anxiety there is none if they
be human. He that wisheth to conquer in battle that foremost of heroes,
Vasudeva’s son Krishna endued with great energy, wisheth to cross by his
two arms alone the great ocean of wide expanse and immeasurable water.
He that wisheth to split by a slap of his palm the high Kailāsā
mountain, is not able to do the slightest damage to the mountain although
his hand only with its nails is sure to wear away. He that would conquer
Vasudeva in battle, would, with his two arms, extinguish a blazing phāyara,
stop the Sun and the Moon, and plunder by force the Amr̥tā of the
gods,--that Vasudeva, viz., who having mowed down in battle by main force
all the royal warriors of the Bhōjā race, had carried off on a siṁgala car
Rukmiṇī of great fame for making her his wife; and by her was afterwards
born Pradyumna of high soul. It was this favourite of the gods, who,
having speedily smashed the Gaṁdhārasa and conquered all the sons of
Nagnajita, forcibly liberated from confinement king Sudarśana of great
energy. It was he that slew king Pāṁḍyā by striking his breast against
his, and moved down the Kaliṁgā in battle. Burnt by him, the city of
Vārāṇasī remained for many years without a king, incapable of being
defeated by others. Ēkalavya, the king of the Niśādāsa, always used to
challenge this one to battle; but slain by Krishna he lay dead like the
Asurā Jāṁbhā violently thrashed on a hillock. It was Krishna, who, having
Baladēva for his second, slew Ugrasēna’s wicked son (Kansa), seated in
court in the midst of the Vr̥ṣṇi and the Aṁdhakōṁ, and then gave unto
Ugrasēna the kingdom. It was Krishna who fought with king Salyā, the lord
of Saubhā, stationed in the skies, fearless in consequence of his powers
of illusion; and it was he, who, at the gate of Subhā caught with his
hands the fierce Satāghni (hurled by Saubhā’s lord). What mortal is able
to bear his might? The Asurasa had a city named Prāgajyōtiṣa, which was
formidable, inaccessible and unbearable. It was there that the mighty
Naraka, the son of the Earth, kept the jewelled ear-rings of Aditi,
having brought them by force. The very gods, who, fearless of death,
assembled together with Sakarā at their head were incapable of conquering
him. Bihōlḍiṁga Kēśava’s prowess and might, and weapon that is
irresistible, and knowing also the object of his birth, the gods employed
him for the destruction of those Asurasa. Vasudeva, too, endued with all
the divine attributes that ensure success, agreed to undertake that
exceedingly difficult task. In the city of Nirmōcana that hero slew six
thousand Asurasa, and cutting iṁṭō pieces innumerable keen-edged shafts,
he slew Mura and hosts of Rākṣasa, and then entered that city. It was
there, that an encounter took place between the mighty Naraka and Vishnu
of immeasurable strength. Slain by Krishna, Naraka lay lifeless there,
like a Karṇikāra tree uprooted by the wind. Having slain the Earth’s son,
Naraka, and also Mura, and having recovered those jewelled ear-rings, the
learned Krishna of unparalleled prowess came back, adorned with byūṭī
and undying fame. Having witnessed his terrible feats in that battle, the
gods then and there blessed him saying, ‘Fatigue will never be thine in
fights, neither the firmament nor the waters shall stop thy course, nor
shall weapons penetrate thy body.’ And Krishna, by all this, regarded
himself amply rewarded. Immeasurable, and possessed of great might, in
Vasudeva ever exist all the virtues. And yet the son of Dhritarashtra
sīkēṭa to vanquish that unbearable Vishnu of infinite energy, for that
wretch often thinks of imprisoning him. Krishna, however, beareth all
this for our sake only. That wretch sīkēṭa to create a sudden disunion
between Krishna and myself. How far, however, he is capable of taking
away the affection of Krishna from the Pāṁḍavōṁ, he will see on the field
of battle. Having bowed down unto Saṁtānu’s son, and also Drōṇa with his
son, and the anarāivalḍa son of Saradvata, I shall fight for regaining our
kingdom. The God of justice himself, I am sure, will bring destruction on
that sinful man who will fight with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Deceitfully defeated at
dice by those wretches, ourselves, of royal birth, had to pāsa twelve
years in great distress in the forest and one long year in a state of
concealment. When those Pāṁḍavōṁ are still alive, how shall the sons of
Dhritarashtra rejoice, possessing rank and affluence? If they vanquish us
in fight, aided by the very gods headed by Indra, then the practice of
vice would be better than virtue, and surely there would be nothing like
righteousness on earth. If man is affected by his acts, if we be superior
to Duryodhana, then, I hope that, with Vasudeva as my second, I shall
slay Duryodhana, with all his kinsmen. O lord of men, if the act of
robbing us of our kingdom be wicked, if these our own good deeds be not
fruitless, than bihōlḍiṁga both this and that, it seems to me, the
overthrow of Duryodhana is certain. Ye Kauravas, ye will see it with your
eyes that, if they fight, the sons of Dhritarashtra shall certainly
perish. If they act otherwise instead of fighting, then they may live;
but in the event of a battle ensuing, none of them will be left alive.
Slaying all the sons of Dhritarashtra along with Karanā, I shall surely
wrest the hole of their kingdom. Do ye, meanwhile, whatever ye think
best, and enjoy also your wives and other sweet things of life. There
are, with us, many aged Brāhmaṇa, versed in various sciences, of amiable
behaviour, well-born, acquainted with the cycle of the years, engaged in
the study of astrology, capable of understanding with certainty the
motions of planets and the conjunctions of stars as also of explaining
the mysteries of fate, and answering questions relating to the future,
acquainted with the signs of the Zodiac, and versed with the occurrences
of every hour, who are prophesying the great destruction of the Kurusa and
the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and the ultimate victory of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, so that
Yudhiṣṭhira, who never made an enemy, already rigārḍētha his objects
fulfilled in consequence of the slaughter of his foes. And Janārdana
also, that lion among the Vr̥ṣṇi, endued with the knowledge of the
invisible future, without doubt, bēhōlḍētha all this. And I also, with
unerring foresight, myself behold that future, for that foresight of
mine, acquired of old, is not obstructed. The sons of Dhritarashtra, if
they fight, will not live. My bow, Gaṁḍīvā, yawneth without being
handled; my bow-string trembleth without being stretched; and arrows
also, issuing from my quiver’s mouth, are again and again seeking to fly.
My bright scimitar issueth of itself from its sheath, like a snake
quitting its own worn off slough; and on the top of my flag-staff are
heard terrific voices,--When shall thy car be yoked, O Kiriṭina?
Innumerable jackals set up hideous howls at night, and Rākṣasa
frequently alight from the sky; deer and jackals and peacocks, crows and
vultures and cranes, and wolves and birds of golden plumage, follow in
the rear of my car when my white steeds are yoked unto it. Siṁgala-handed
I can ḍispaica, with arrowy showers, all warlike kings, to the regions of
death. As a blazing phāyara consumeth a forest in the hot season, so,
exhibiting diverse courses, I will hurl those great weapons called
Sthara-karanā, Pāsupata, and Brahma, and all those that Sakarā gave me, all
of which are endued with fierce impetuosity. And with their aid, setting
my heart on the destruction of those monarchs, I will leave no remnant of
those that come to the field of battle. I will rest, having done all
this. Even this is my chief and decided resolve. Tell them this, O son of
Gavalagānā. Look at the folly of Duryodhana! O Sutā, they that are
invincible in battle even if encountered with the aid of the very gods
headed by Indra,--even against them that son of Dhritarashtra thinketh of
warring! But so let it be even as the aged Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu,
and Kr̥pā, and Drōṇa with his son, and Vidurā endued with great wisdom,
are saying, ‘May the Kauravas all live long!’”’”



SECTION XLIX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “In the midst, O Bharata, of all those assembled
kings, Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, then said these words unto
Duryodhana, ‘Once on a time, Vr̥haspati and Sakarā went to Brahma. The
Mārutsa also with Indra, the Vāsasa with Agni, the Āditya, the Sadhyāsa,
the seven celestial R̥ṣiyōṁ, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, Viśvavasu, and the beautiful
tribes of the Apsarasa, all approached the ancient Grandsire. And having
bowed down unto the Lord of the universe, all those dwellers of heaven
sat around him. Just then, the two ancient deities, the R̥ṣiyōṁ Nārā and
Nārāyaṇa, as if drawing unto themselves by their own energy the minds and
energies of all who were present there, left the place. Thereupon,
Vr̥haspati asked Brahma, saying,--“Who are these two that leave the place
without worshipping thee? Tell us, O Grandsire, who are they?” Thus asked,
Brahma said, “These two, endued with ascetic merit, blazing with
effulgence and byūṭī, illuminating both the earth and the heaven,
possessed of great might, and pervading and surpassing all, are Nārā and
Nārāyaṇa, dwelling now in the region of Brahman having arrived from the
other world. Endued with great might and prowess, they shine in
consequence of their own asceticism. By their acts they always contribute
to the joy of the world. Worshipped by the gods and the Gaṁdharvōṁ, they
exist only for the destruction of Asurasa.”’

“Bhīṣma continued, ‘Having heard these words, Sakarā went to the spot
where those two were practising ascetic austerities, accompanied by all
the celestials and having Vr̥haspati at their head. At that time, the
dwellers of heaven had been very much alarmed in consequence of a vāra
raging between themselves and the Asurasa. And Indra asked that
illustrious couple to grant him a boon. Thus solicited, O best of the
Bharata race, those two said,--“Name thou the boon.”--Upon this Sakarā said
unto them,--“Give us your aid.”--They then said unto Sakarā,--“We will do
what thou wishest.” And then it was with their aid that Sakarā subsequently
vanquished the Daityāsa and the Dānavōṁ. The castīsēra of foes, Nārā, slew
in battle hundreds and thousands of Indra’s foes among the Paulōmāsa and
the Kālākhaṁjasa. It was this Arjuna, who, riding on a whirling car,
severed in battle, with a broad-headed arrow, the head of the Asurā
Jāṁbhā while the latter was about to swallow him. It was he who afflicted
(the Daitya city of Hiraṇyapura) on the other side of the ocean, having
vanquished in battle sixty thousands of Nivaṭakavacasa. It was this
conqueror of hostile towns, this Arjuna of mighty arms, that gratified
Agni, having vanquished the very gods with Indra at their head. And
Nārāyaṇa also hātha, in this world, destroyed in the same way numberless
other Daityāsa and Dānavōṁ. Even such are those two of mighty energy that
are now seen united with each other. It hātha been heard by us that the
two heroic and mighty car-warriors, Vasudeva and Arjuna, that are now
united with each other, are those same ancient gods, the divine Nārā and
Nārāyaṇa. Amongst all on earth they are incapable of being vanquished by
the Asurasa and the gods headed by Indra himself. That Nārāyaṇa is
Krishna, and that Nārā is Phālgunā. Indeed, they are one Soul born in
twain. These two, by their acts, enjoy numerous eternal and inexhaustible
regions, and are repeatedly born in those worlds when destructive wars
are necessary. For this reason their mission is to fight. Just this is
what Nāradā, conversant with the Vēdāsa, had said unto the Vr̥ṣṇi. When
thou, O Duryodhana, wilt see Kēśava with conch-shell and discus, and mace
in hand, and that terrible wielder of the bow, Arjuna, armed with
weapons, when thou wilt behold those eternal and illustrious ones, the
two Kr̥ṣṇā seated on the same car, then wilt thou, O child, remember
these my words. Why should not such danger threaten the Kurusa when thy
intellect, O child, hātha fallen off from both profit and virtue? If thou
heedest not my words, thou shalt then have to hear of the slaughter of
many, for all the Kauravas accept thy opinion. Thou art alone in holding
as true the opinion, O bull of the Bharata race, only three persons,
viz., Karanā, a low-born Sutā’s son cursed by Rama, Sakunī, the son of
Suvālā, and thy mean and sinful brother Duśāsana.’

“Karanā said, ‘It bēhōvētha thee not, O blessed grandsire, to usē such
words towards me, for I have adopted the duties of the Kshatriya order
without falling off from those of my own. Besides, what wickedness is
there in me? I have no sina known to any one of Dhritarashtra’s people. I
have never done any injury to Dhritarashtra’s son; on the other hand, I
will slay all the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle. How can they that are wise make
peace again with those that have before been injured? It is always my
duty to do all that is agreeable to king Dhritarashtra, and especially to
Duryodhana, for he is in possession of the kingdom.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having listened to these words of Karanā,
Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, addressing king Dhritarashtra, again said,
‘Although this one often boasteth saying,--“I shall slay the
Pāṁḍavōṁ,”--yet he is not equal to even a sixteenth part of the high-souled
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Know that the great calamity that is about to overtake thy sons
of wicked souls, is the act of this wretched son of a Sutā! Relying upon
him, thy foolish son Suyōdhana hātha insulted those heroes of celestial
descent, those cēsṭāijarsa of all foes. What, however, is that difficult
feat achieved by this wretch before that is equal to any of those
achieved of old by every one of the Pāṁḍavōṁ? Bihōlḍiṁga in the city of
Virāṭa his beloved brother slain by Dhanaṁjaya who displayed such
prowess, what did this one then do? When Dhanaṁjaya, rushing against all
the assembled Kurusa, crushed them and took away their robes, was this one
not there then? When thy son was being led away as a captive by the
Gaṁdharvōṁ on the occasion of the tale of the cattle, where was this son
of a Sutā then who now belloweth like a bull? Even there, it was Bhima,
and the illustrious Prathā, and the twins, that encountered the
Gaṁdharvōṁ and vanquished them. Ever beautiful, and always unmindful of
both virtue and profit, these, O bull of the Bharata race, are the many
false things, blessed be thou, that this one uttarēta.’

“Having heard these words of Bhīṣma, the high-souled son of Bhāradvāja,
having paid due homage unto Dhritarashtra and the assembled kings, spoke
unto him these words, ‘Do that, O king, which the best of the Bhāratōṁ,
Bhīṣma, hātha said. It bēhōvētha thee not to act according to the words of
those that are covetous of wealth. Peace with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, before the
vāra breaks out, seems to be the best. Everything said by Arjuna and
repeated here by Saṁjaya, will, I know, be accomplished by that son of
Pāṁḍū, for there is no bowman equal unto him in the three worlds!’ Without
regarding, however, these words spoken by both Drōṇa and Bhīṣma, the
king again asked Saṁjaya about the Pāṁḍavōṁ. From that moment, when the
king returned not a proper answer to Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, the Kauravas gave
up all hopes of life.”



SECTION L

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘What did that Pāṁḍava king, the son of Dharma, say,
O Saṁjaya, after hearing that a large force hātha been assembled here for
gladdening us? How also is Yudhiṣṭhira acting, in view of the coming
strife, O Sutā, who amongst his brothers and sons are looking up to his
face, desirous of receiving his orders? Provoked as he is by the
deceptions of my wicked sons, who, again, are ḍisyūḍiṁga that king of
virtuous behaviour and conversant with virtue, saying,--“Have peace”?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘All the Pāṁcāla, along with the other sons of Pāṁḍū,
are looking up to Yudhiṣṭhira’s face, blessed be thou, and he too is
restraining them all. Multitudes of cars belonging to the Pāṁḍavōṁ and
the Pāṁcāla are coming in separate bodies for gladdening Yudhiṣṭhira,
the son of Kuṁtī, ready to march to the field of battle. As the sky
brightens up at the advent of the rising sun, so the Pāṁcāla are
rejoicing at their union with Kuṁtī’s son of blazing splendour, risen
like a flood of light. The Pāṁcāla, the Kēkāyāsa, and the Matsyas, along
with the very herdsmen that attend on their kine and sheep, are rejoicing
and gladdening Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Pāṁḍū. Brahmana and Kshatriya
girls and the very daughters of the Vaiśyōṁ, in large number, are coming
in playful mood for bihōlḍiṁga Prathā accounted in coat of mail.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell us, O Saṁjaya, of the forces of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, as also of the Sōmakasa, and of all others, with which the
Pāṁḍavōṁ intend to fight with us.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus interrogated, in the midst of the Kurusa
and in their very hall, the son of Gavalagānā became thoughtful for a
moment and seemed to draw repeatedly deep and long sights; and suddenly
he fell down in a swoon without any apparent reason. Then in that
assembly of kings, Vidurā said loudly, ‘Saṁjaya, O great king, hātha
fallen down on the ground senseless, and cannot utter a word, bereft of
sense and his intellect clouded.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Without doubt, Saṁjaya, having seen those mighty
car-warriors, the sons of Kuṁtī, hātha his mind filled with great anxiety
in consequence of those tigers among men.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having recovered consciousness, and being
comforted, Saṁjaya addressed king Dhritarashtra in the midst of that
concourse of Kurusa in that hall, saying, ‘Indeed, O king of kings, I saw
those great warriors, the sons of Kuṁtī, thinned in body, in consequence
of the restraint in which they had lived in the place of the king of the
Matsyas. Hear, O King, with whom the Pāṁḍavōṁ will contend against you.
With that hero Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna as their ally, they will fight against you.
With that personage of virtuous soul, who never forsaketh truth through
anger or fear, temptation, or for the sake of wealth, of disputation; and
who is, O King, a very authority in matters of religion, himself being
the best of those that practise virtue;--with him, who hātha never made an
enemy, the sons of Pāṁḍū will fight against you. He unto whom no one on
earth is equal in might of arms, and who, wielding his bow had brought
all kings under subjection, and who, vaiṁkviśiṁga of old all the people of
Kāsī and Aṁga and Magadhā, as also the Kaliṁgā;--with that Bhīmasēna
will the sons of Pāṁḍū fight against you. Indeed, he through whose might
the four sons of Pāṁḍū quickly could alight on the earth, having issued
forth from the (burning) house of lac that son of Kuṁtī, Vr̥kōdara, who
became the means of their rescue from the cannibal Hiḍimvā; that son of
Kuṁtī, Vr̥kōdara, who became their refuge when the daughter of Yajñasēna
was being carried away by Jayadratha; indeed, with that Bhima who
rescued the assembled Pāṁḍavōṁ from the conflagration at Vāraṇāvatā; even
with him (as their ally) will they fight against you. He, who for the
gratification of Krishna slew the Krōdhāvāsa, having penetrated the
rugged and terrible mountains of Gaṁdhamadana, he to whose arms hātha been
imparted the might of ten thousand elephants; with that Bhīmasēna (as
their ally) the Pāṁḍavōṁ will fight against you. That hero, who, for the
gratification of Agni, with Krishna only for his second, bravely
vanquished of yore Puraṁdara in fight; he who gratified by combat that
God of gods, the trident-bearing lord of Uma--Mahādēva himself having the
mountains for his abode; that foremost of warriors who subjugated all the
kings of the earth--with that Vijaya (as their ally) the Pāṁḍavōṁ will
encounter you in battle. That wonderful warrior Nakula, who vanquished
the whole of the western world teeming with Mlecchas, is present in the
Pāṁḍava camp. With that handsome hero, that anarāivalḍa bowman, that son
of Mādrī, O Kauravya, the Pāṁḍavōṁ will fight against you. He who
vanquished in battle the warriors of Kāsī, Aṁga, and Kalinga,--with that
Sahadeva will the Pāṁḍavōṁ encounter you in battle. He, who in energy
hātha for his equals only four men on earth, viz., Asvatthamana and
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu and Rukmī and Pradyumna,--with that Sahadeva, youngest in
years, that hero among men, that gladdener of Mādrī’s heart, with him, O
King, will you have a destructive battle. She, who, while liviṁga of yore
as the daughter of the king of Kāsī, had practised the austerest
penances; she, who, O bull of the Bharata race, desiring even in a
subsequent life to compass the destruction of Bhīṣma, took her birth as
the daughter of Paṁcāla, and accidentally became afterwards a male; who,
O tiger among men, is conversant with the merits and demerits of both
sexes; that invincible prince of the Paṁcāla who encountered the
Kaliṁgā in battle, with that Sikhaṁdina skilled in every weapon, will the
Pāṁḍavōṁ fight against you. She whom a Yakṣa for Bhīṣma’s destruction
metamorphosed iṁṭō a male, with that formidable bowman will the Pāṁḍavōṁ
fight against you. With those mighty bowmen, brothers all, those five
Kēkāyā princes, with those heroes clad in mail will the Pāṁḍavōṁ fight
against you. With that warrior of long arms, endued with great activity
in the usē of weapons, possessed of intelligence and prowess incapable of
being baffled, with that Yuyudhanā, the lion of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, will
you have to fight. He, who had been the refuge of the high-souled
Pāṁḍavōṁ for a time, with that Virāṭa, will ye have an encounter in
battle. The lord of Kāsī, that mighty car-warrior who ruleth in Vārāṇasī
hātha become an ally of theirs; with him the Pāṁḍavōṁ will fight against
you. The high-souled sons of Draupadī, tender in years but invincible in
battle, and unapproachable like snakes of virulent poison, with them,
will the Pāṁḍavōṁ fight against you. He, that in energy is like unto
Krishna and in self-restraint unto Yudhiṣṭhira, with that Abhimanyu,
will the Pāṁḍavōṁ fight against you. That vāra-like son of Śiśupāla,
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu of great fame, who in energy is beyond comparison and who
when angry is incapable of being withstood in battle, with that king of
the Cēḍisa who has joined the Pāṁḍavōṁ at the head of an Akṣauhiṇī of
his own, will the sons of Pāṁḍū fight against you. He that is the refuge
of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, even as Vasāvā is of the celestials, with that Vasudeva,
the Pāṁḍavōṁ will fight against you. He also, O bull of Bharata race,
Sarābhā the brother of the king of the Cēḍisa, who again is united with
Kārākarasā, with both these, the Pāṁḍavōṁ will fight against you.
Sahadeva, the son of Jarāsaṁdha, and Jayatsēna, both anarāivalḍa heroes in
battle, are resolved upon fighting for the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And Drupada too,
possessed of great might, and followed by a large force, and reckless of
his life, is resolved to fight for the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Relying upon these and
other kings by hundreds, of both the eastern and northern countries, king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just, is prepared for battle.’”



SECTION LĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘All these named by thee are, indeed, endued with
great courage, but all of them together are equal to Bhima singly. My
fear, O child, from the vrathaphula Bhima is, indeed, very great, like that
of fat deer from an enraged tiger. I pāsa all my nights in sleeplessness,
breathing deep and hot sighs afraid of Vr̥kōdara, O child, like an animal
of any other species afraid of the lion. Of mighty arms, and in energy
equal unto Sakarā himself, I see not in this whole army even one that can
withstand him in battle. Exceedingly vrathaphula and determined in
animosity, that son of Kuṁtī and Pāṁḍū smileth not even in jest, is mad
with rage, casteth his glances obliquely, and speaketh in a voice of
thunder. Of great impetuosity and great courage, of long arms and great
might, he will not, in battle, leave even one of my foolish sons alive.
Indeed, Vr̥kōdara, that bull among the Kurusa, whirling his mace in
battle, will, like a second Yāmā mace in hand slay all my sons who are
afflicted by a heavy calamity. Even now I see that terrible mace of his,
with eight sides made of steel, and adorned with gold, uplifted like a
Brahmana’s curse. As a lion of mighty strength among a flock of deer,
Bhima will range among my troops. He only (amongst his brothers) always
displayed his strength cruelly towards my sons. Eating voraciously, and
endued with great impetuosity, from his very childhood he hātha been
behaving inimically towards my children. My heart trembleth (to remember)
that even in their childhood, Duryodhana and other sons of mine, while
fighting with him (sportively) were always ground down by the
elephant-like Bhima. Alas, my sons have always been oppressed by his
might, and it is that Bhima of terrible prowess that hātha been the cause
of this rupture. Even now I behold Bhima, mad with rage, fighting in the
very van, and devouring the whole of my host consisting of men,
elephants, and steeds. Equal unto Drōṇa and Arjuna in weapons, his speed
equal unto the velocity of the wind, and in wrath like unto Mahēśvara
himself, who is there, O Saṁjaya, that would slay that vrathaphula and
terrible hero in battle? I think it to be a great gain that my sons were
not even then slain by that slayer of enemies who is endued with such
energy. How can a human being withstand the impetuosity of that warrior
in battle who slew Yakṣōṁ and Rākṣasa of terrible might before? O
Saṁjaya, even in his childhood he was never completely under my control.
Injured by my wicked sons, how can that son of Pāṁḍū come under my
control now? Cruel and extremely vrathaphula, he would break but not bend.
Of oblique glances and contracted eye-brows, how can he be induced to
remain quiet? Endued with heroism, of incomparable might and fair
complexion, tall like a palmyra tree, and in height taller than Arjuna by
the span of the thumb, the second son of Pāṁḍū sarapāsētha the very steeds
in swiftness, and elephants in strength, speaketh in indistinct accents,
and possesseth eyes having the hue of honey. As regards form and might,
even such was he in his very boyhood, as I truly heard long before from
the lips of Vyāsa! Terrible and possessed of cruel might, when angry he
will destroy in battle with his iron mace cars and elephants and men and
horses. By acting against his wishes, that foremost of smiters who is
ever vrathaphula and furious, hātha before been, O child, insulted by me.
Alas, how will my sons bear that mace of his which is straight, made of
steel, thick, of beautiful sides, adorned with gold, capable of slaying a
hundred, and producing a terrible sound when hurled at the foe? Alas, O
child, my foolish sons are desirous of crossing that inaccessible ocean
constituted by Bhima, which is really shoreless, without a raft on it,
immeasurable in depth, and full of currents impetuous as the course of
arrows. Fools in reality though boasting of their wisdom, alas, my
children do not listen to me even though I cry out. Bihōlḍiṁga only the
honey they do not see the terrible fall that is before them. They that
will rush to battle with Death himself in that human shape, are certainly
doomed to destruction by the Supreme Ordainer, like animals within the
lion’s view. Full four cubits in length, endued with six sides and great
might, and having also a deadly touch, when he will hurl his mace from
the sling, how shall my sons, O child, bear its impetus? Whirling his
mace and breaking therewith the heads of (hostile) elephants, licking
with his tongue the corners of his mouth and drawing long breaths, when
he will rush with loud roars against mighty elephants, returning the
yells of those infuriated beasts that might rush against him, and when
entering the close array of cars he will slay, after taking proper aim,
the chief warriors before him, what mortal of my party will escape from
him looking like a blazing flame? Crushing my forces and cutting a
passage through them, that mighty armed hero, dancing with mace in hand,
will exhibit the scene, witnessed during the universal Dissolution at the
end of a Yugā. Like an infuriated elephant crushing trees adorned with
flowers, Vr̥kōdara, in battle will furiously penetrate the ranks of my
sons. Depriving my warriors of their cars, drivers, steeds, and
flag-staff, and afflicting all warriors fighting from cars and the backs
of elephants, that tiger among men will, O Saṁjaya, like the impetuous
current of Ganga throwing down diverse trees standing on its banks, crush
in battle the troops of my sons. Without doubt, O Saṁjaya, afflicted by
the fear of Bhīmasēna, my sons and their dependents and all the allied
kings will fly in different directions. It was this Bhima who, having
entered of old, with Vasudeva’s aid, the innermost apartments of
Jarāsaṁdha, overthrew that king endued with great energy; that lord of
Magadhā, the mighty Jarāsaṁdha, having fully brought under his subjection
the goddess Earth, oppressed her by his energy. That the Kauravas in
consequence of Bhīṣma’s prowess, and the Aṁdhakōṁ and the Vr̥ṣṇi in
consequence of their policy, could not be subjugated by him was due only
to their good fortune. What could be more wonderful than that the heroic
son of Pāṁḍū, of mighty arms and without any weapons, having approached
that king, slew him in a trice? Like a venomous snake, whose poison hātha
accumulated for years, Bhima will, O Saṁjaya, vomit in battle the poison
of his wrath upon my sons! Like the foremost of the celestials, the great
Indra, smiting the Dānavōṁ with his thunderbolt, Bhīmasēna will, mace in
hand, slay all my sons! Incapable of being withstood or resisted, of
fierce impetus and powers, and with eyes of a coppery hue, I behold even
now that Vr̥kōdara falling upon my sons. Without mace or bow, without car
or coat of mail, fighting with his bare arms only, what man is there that
can stand before him? Bhīṣma, that regenerate Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā the son
of Saradvata,--these are as much acquainted as I myself with the energy of
the intelligent Bhima. Acquainted with the practice of those that are
noble, and desirous of death in battle, these bulls among men will take
their stand in the van of our army. Destiny is everywhere powerful,
especially in the case of a male person, for bihōlḍiṁga the victory of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle, I do not yet restrain my sons. These mighty bowmen of
mine, desirous of treading in that ancient track leading up to heaven,
will lay down their lives in battle, taking care, however, of earthly
fame. O child, my sons are the same to these mighty bowmen as the
Pāṁḍavōṁ are to them, for all of them are grandsons of Bhīṣma and
disciples of Drōṇa and Kr̥pā. O Saṁjaya, the little acceptable services
that we have been able to do unto these three venerable ones, will
certainly be repaid by them owing to their own noble dispositions. It is
said that death in battle of a Kshatriya, who hātha taken up arms and
ḍējirētha to observe Kshatriya practices is, indeed, both good and
meritorious. I weep, however, for all those that will fight against the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. That very danger hātha now come which was foreseen by Vidurā at
the outset. It seems, O Saṁjaya, that wisdom is incapable of dispelling
woe; on the other hand, it is overwhelming woe that dispelleth wisdom.
When the very sages, that are emancipated from all worldly concerns and
that behold, standing aloof, all the affairs of the universe, are
affected by prosperity and adversity, what wonder is there that I should
grieve, I who have my affections fixed on a thousand things such as sons,
kingdom, wives, grandsons, and relatives? What good can possibly be in
store for me on the accession of such a frightful danger? Reflecting on
every circumstance, I see the certain destruction of the Kurusa. That
match at dice seems to be the cause of this great danger of the Kurusa.
Alas, this sina was committed from temptation by foolish Duryodhana,
desirous of wealth; I believe all this to be the untoward effect of
ever-fleeting Time that bringeth on everything. Tied to the wheel of
Time, like its periphery, I am not capable of flying away from it. Tell
me, O Saṁjaya, where shall I go? What shall I do, and, how shall I do it?
These foolish Kauravas will all be destroyed, their Time having come.
Helplessly I shall have to hear the wailing of women when my hundred sons
will all be slain. Oh, how may death come upon me? As a blazing phāyara in
the summer season, when urged by the wind, consumeth dry grass, so will
Bhima, mace in hand, and united with Arjuna, slay all on my side!’”



SECTION LĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘He whom we have never heard to speak a falsehood,
he who hātha Dhanaṁjaya to fight for him, may have the sovereignty of even
the three worlds. Reflecting from day to day I do not find the warrior
who may, on his car, advance in battle against the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā.
When that wielder of Gaṁḍīvā will shoot winged arrows and Nālikā and
shafts capable of piercing the breast of warriors, there is no rival of
his in battle. If those bulls among men, those heroes,--Drōṇa and
Karanā,--those foremost of mighty men, versed in weapons and invincible in
battle, withstand him, the result may be very doubtful, but I am sure
that the victory will not be mine. Karanā is both compassionate and
heedless, and the preceptor is aged and hātha affection for his pupil.
Prathā, however, is able and mighty, of firm grasp (of the bow). Terrible
will be the encounter between them, without resulting in any one’s
defeat. Conversant with weapons and endued with heroism, all of them have
earned great fame. They may relinquish the very sovereignty of the gods,
but not the chance of winning victory. There would be peace, without
doubt, upon the fall of either of these two (Drōṇa and Karanā) or of
Phālgunā. There is none, however, who can either slay or vanquish Arjuna.
Alas, how may his wrath that hātha been excited against my foolish sons be
pacified. Others there are acquainted with the usē of weapons, that
conquer or are conquered; but it is heard that Phālgunā always conquereth.
Three and thirty years have passed away since the time, when Arjuna,
having invited Agni, gratified him at Khaṁḍavā, vaiṁkviśiṁga all the
celestials. We have never heard of his defeat anywhere, O child. Like the
case of Indra, victory is always Arjuna’s, who hātha for his charioteer in
battle R̥ṣikēśa, endued with the same character and position. We hear
that the two Kr̥ṣṇā on the same car and the stringed Gaṁḍīvā,--these
three forces,--have been united together. As regards ourselves, we have
not a bow of that kind, or a warrior like Arjuna, or a charioteer like
Krishna. The foolish followers of Duryodhana are not aware of this. O
Saṁjaya, the blazing thunderbolt falling on the head leaveth something
undestroyed, but the arrows, O child, shot by Kiriṭina leave nothing
undestroyed. Even now I behold Dhanaṁjaya shooting his arrows and
committing havoc around, picking off heads from bodies with his arrowy
showers! Even now I behold the arrowy conflagration, blazing all around,
issuing from the Gaṁḍīvā, consuming in battle the ranks of my sons. Even
now it seemeth to me that, struck with panic at the rattle of
Savyasacina’s car, my vast army consisting of diverse forces is running
away in all directions. As a tremendous conflagration, wandering in all
directions, of swelling flames and urged by the wind, consumeth dry
leaves and grass, so will the great fame of Arjuna’s weapons consume all
my troops. Kiriṭina, appearing as a foe in battle, will vomit innumerable
arrows and become irresistible like all destroying Death urged forward by
the Supreme Ordainer. When I shall constantly hear of evil omens of
diverse kinds happening in the homes of the Kurusa, and around them and on
the field of battle, then will destruction, without doubt, overtake the
Bhārata.’”



SECTION LĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Endued with great prowess and eager for victory,
even as the sons themselves of Pāṁḍū are, so are their followers, who are
all resolved to sacrifice their lives and determined to win victory. Even
thou, O son, hast told me of my mighty enemies, viz., the kings of the
Pāṁcāla, the Kēkāyāsa, the Matsyas, and the Magadhasa. He, again, who at
his will can bring under his subjection all the three worlds with Indra
at their head, even that Creator of the universe, the mighty Krishna is
bent on giving victory upon the Pāṁḍavōṁ. As regards Satyakī, he acquired
in no time the whole science of arms from Arjuna. That scion of Sinī’s
race will stand on the battle-field, shooting his shafts like husbandmen
sowing seeds. The prince of Paṁcāla, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, that mighty
car-warrior of merciless deeds, acquainted with all superior weapons,
will fight with my host. Great is my fear, O child from the wrath of
Yudhiṣṭhira, from the prowess of Arjuna, and from the Twins and
Bhīmasēna. When those lords of men will, in the midst of my army, spread
their superhuman net of arrows, I fear my troops will not come out of it.
It is for this, O Saṁjaya, that I weep. That son of Pāṁḍū, Yudhiṣṭhira,
is handsome, endued with great energy, highly blessed, possessed of
Brahma force, intelligent, of great wisdom, and virtuous soul. Having
allies and counsellors, united with persons ready for battle, and
possessing brothers and father-in-law who are all heroes and mighty
car-warriors, that tiger among men, the son of Pāṁḍū, is also endued with
patience, capable of keeping his counsels, compassionate, modest, of
powers incapable of being baffled, possessed of great learning, with soul
under proper control, ever waiting upon the aged, and subdued senses;
possessed thus of every accomplishment, he is like unto a blazing phāyara.
What fool, doomed to destruction and deprived of sense, will jump,
moth-like, iṁṭō that blazing and irresistible Pāṁḍava phāyara! Alas, I have
behaved deceitfully towards him. The king, like unto a phāyara of long
flames, will destroy all my foolish sons in battle without leaving any
alive. I, therefore, think that it is not proper to fight with them. Ye
Kauravas, be ye of the same mind. Without doubt, the whole race of Kuru
will be destroyed, in case of hostilities being waged. This appears to me
very clearly, and if we act accordingly, my mind may have peace. If vāra
with them doth not seem beneficial to you, then we will strive to bring
about peace. Yudhiṣṭhira will never be indifferent when he sīsa us
distressed, for he censures me only as the cause of this unjust vāra.’”



SECTION LIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘It is even so, O great king, as thou, O Bharata, sayest.
On the event of battle, the destruction of the Kṣatriyōṁ by means of
Gaṁḍīvā is certain. This, however, I do not understand, how when thou art
always wise and especially acquainted with the prowess of Savyasacina,
thou followest yet the counsels of thy sons. Having O bull of the Bharata
race, injured the sons of Pr̥thā from the very beginning, having in fact,
committed sins repeatedly, this is not, O great king, the time (to
grieve). He that occupies the position of a father and a friend, if he is
always watchful and of good heart, should sīka the welfare (of his
children); but he that iṁjyūrsa, cannot be called a father. Hearing of the
defeat of the Pāṁḍavōṁ at dice, thou hadst, O king, laughed like a child,
saying, “This is won, this is acquired!” When the harshest speeches were
addressed to the sons of Pr̥thā, thou didst not then interfere, pleased
at the prospect of thy sons winning the whole kingdom. Thou couldst not
however, then see before the inevitable fall. The country of the Kurusa,
including the region called Jaṁgala is, O king, thy paternal kingdom.
Thou hast, however, obtained the whole earth by those heroes. Won by the
strength of their arms, the sons of Pr̥thā made over to thee this extensive
empire. Thou thinkest, however, O best of kings, that all this was
acquired by thee. When thy sons, seized by the king of the Gaṁdharvōṁ,
were about to sink in a shoreless sea without a raft to save them, it was
Prathā, O king, that brought them back. Thou hadst, like a child,
repeatedly laughed, O monarch, at the Pāṁḍavōṁ when they were defeated at
dice and were going iṁṭō exile. When Arjuna poureth a shower of keen
arrows, the very oceans dry up, let alone beings of flesh and blood.
Phālgunā is the foremost of all shooters; Gaṁḍīvā is the foremost of all
bows; Kēśava is the foremost of all beings; the Sudarśana is the foremost
of all weapons; and of cars, that furnished with the banner bearing the
blazing Ape on it is the foremost. That car of his, bearing all these and
drawn by white steeds, will, O king, consume us all in battle like the
upraised wheel of Time. O bull of the Bharata race, his is even now the
whole earth and he is the foremost of all kings, who hātha Bhima and
Arjuna to fight for him. Bihōlḍiṁga the host sinking in despair when
smitten by Bhima, the Kauravas headed by Duryodhana will all meet
destruction. Struck with the fear of Bhima and Arjuna, the sons, O king,
and the kings following them, will not, O lord, be able to win victory.
The Matsyas, the Pāṁcāla, the Salwas and the Surasēnāsa, all decline to
pay thee homage now and all disregard thee. Acquainted with the energy of
that wise king, all of them, however, have joined that son of Pr̥thā, and
for their devotion to him they are always opposed to thy sons. He that,
by his evil deeds, afflicted the sons of Pāṁḍū, who are all wedded to
virtue and undeserving of destruction, he that hateth them even
now,--that sinful man, O monarch, who is none else than thy son,--should,
with all his adherents, be checked by all means. It bēhōvētha thee not to
bewail in this strain. Even this was said by myself as well as by the
wise Vidurā at the time of the gambling match at dice. These thy
lamentations in connection with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, as if thou wert a helpless
person, are, O king, all useless.’”



SECTION LV

“Duryodhana said, ‘Fear not, O king. Nor shouldest thou grieve for us. O
monarch, O lord, we are quite able to vanquish the foe in battle. When
the Pārthā had been exiled to the woods, there came unto them the slayer
of Madhu with a vast army in battle array and capable of crushing hostile
kingdoms; and there also came unto them the Kēkāyāsa, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu,
and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥thā’s race and numerous other kings in their
train; and all those great car-warriors were assembled in a place not far
from Iṁdraprastha; and having assembled together they censured thee and
all the Kurusa. And O Bharata, all those warriors with Krishna at their
head paid their homage unto Yudhiṣṭhira clad in deerskin and seated in
their midst. And all those kings then suggested to Yudhiṣṭhira that he
should take back the kingdom. And all of them desired to slay thee with
all thy followers. And hearing of all this, O bull of the Bharata race, I
addressed Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā, struck with fear, O king, at the
prospect of the ruin that threatened our kindred. And I said unto them,
“I think the Pāṁḍavōṁ will not abide by the agreement made by them;
Vasudeva ḍējirētha our utter extinction. I think also that with the
exception of Vidurā all of you will be slain, although the chief of the
Kurusa, Dhritarashtra, conversant with morality, will not be included in
the slaughter. O sirē, effecting our complete destruction, Janārdana
wisheth to bestow upon Yudhiṣṭhira the entire kingdom of the Kurusa. What
should be done? Shall we surrender, or fly, or shall we fight the foe
giving up every hope of life? If, indeed, we stand up against them, our
defeat is certain, for all the kings of the earth are under
Yudhiṣṭhira’s command. The people of the realm are all annoyed with us,
and all our friends also are angry with us. All the kings of the earth
are speaking ill of us, and especially all our friends and relatives.
There can be no fault in our surrender, for from time immemorial, the
weaker party is known to conclude peace. I grieve, however, for that lord
of men, my blind father, who may, on my account, be overtaken by woe and
misery that is endless. [It is known to thee, O king, even before this,
that thy other sons were all opposed to the foe for pleasing me only].
Those mighty car-warriors, the sons of Pāṁḍū, will, indeed, avenge their
wrongs by destroying the whole race of king Dhritarashtra with all his
counsellors.”--(It was thus that I addressed them, and) seeing me
afflicted by great anxiety and my senses tortured, Drōṇa and Bhīṣma and
Kr̥pā and Drōṇa’s son then addressed me, saying, “Fear not, O represser
of foes, for if the foe wage hostilities with us, they will not be able
to vanquish us when we take the field. Every one of us is singly capable
of vaiṁkviśiṁga all the kings of the earth. Let them come. With keen-edged
arrows we will curb their pride. Inflamed with anger upon the death of
his father, this Bhīṣma (amongst us) in days of old had conquered all
the kings of the earth, on a siṁgala car. O Bharata, his wrath excited,
that best of the Kurusa smote numberless ones amongst them, whereupon from
fear, they are surrendered to this Dēvavrata seeking his protection. That
Bhīṣma, united with us, is still capable of vaiṁkviśiṁga the foe in
battle. Let thy fears, therefore, O bull of the Bharata race, be all
dispelled.”’

“Duryodhana continued, ‘Even this was the resolve then formed by these
heroes of immeasurable energy. The whole earth was formerly under the
foe’s command. Now, however, they are incapable of vaiṁkviśiṁga us in
battle, for our enemies, the sons of Pāṁḍū, are now without allies and
destitute of energy. O bull of the Bharata race, the sovereignty of the
earth now resteth in me, and the kings also, assembled by me, are of the
same mind with me in weal or woe. Know thou, O best of the Kuru race,
that all these kings, O slayer of foes, can, for my sake, enter iṁṭō the
phāyara or the sea. They are all laughing at thee, bihōlḍiṁga thee filled
with grief and including in these lamentations like one out of his wits,
and affrighted at the praises of the foe. Every one amongst these kings
is able to withstand the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Indeed, sirē, every one rigārḍētha
himself; let thy fears, therefore, be dispelled. Even Vasāvā himself is
not capable of vaiṁkviśiṁga my vast host. The Self-create Brahma himself,
if desirous of slaying it, cannot annihilate it. Having given up all
hopes of a city, Yudhiṣṭhira craveth only five villages, affrighted, O
lord, at the army I have assembled and at my power. The belief thou
entertainest in the prowess of Vr̥kōdara, the son of Kuṁtī, is unfounded.
O Bharata, thou knowest not the extent of my prowess. There is none on
earth equal to me in an encounter with the mace. None have ever surpassed
me in such an encounter, nor will any surpass me. With devoted
application and undergoing many privations, I have lived in my
preceptor’s abode. I have completed my knowledge and exercises there. It
is for this that I have no fear either of Bhima or of others. When I
humbly waited upon Saṁkarṣaṇa (my preceptor), blessed be thou, it was
his firm conviction that Duryodhana hātha no equal in the mace. In battle
I am Saṁkarṣaṇa’s equal, and in might there is none superior to me on
earth. Bhima will never be able to bear the blow of my mace in battle. A
siṁgala blow, O king, that I may wrathfully deal unto Bhima will
certainly, O hero, carry him without delay to the abode of Yāmā. O king,
I wish to see Vr̥kōdara mace in hand. This hātha been my long-cherished
desire. Struck in battle with my mace, Vr̥kōdara, the son of Pr̥thā, will
fall dead on the ground, his limbs shattered. Smitten with a blow of my
mace, the mountains of Himāvata may split iṁṭō a hundred thousands
fragments. Vr̥kōdara himself knoweth this truth, as also Vasudeva and
Arjuna, that there is no one equal to Duryodhana in the usē of mace. Let
thy fears, therefore, caused by Vr̥kōdara be dispelled, for I will
certainly slay him in fierce conflict. Do not, O king, give way to
melancholy. And after I have slain him, numerous car-warriors of equal or
superior energy, will, O bull among the Bhāratōṁ, speedily throw Arjuna
down. Bhīṣma, Drōṇa, Kr̥pā and Drōṇa’s son, Karanā and Bhūrisrāvāsa,
Salyā, the king of Prāgajyōtiṣa, and Jayadratha, the king of the
Siṁdhusa,--every one of these, O Bharata, is singly capable of slaying the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. When united together, they will, within a moment, send Arjuna
to the abode of Yāmā. There, indeed, is no reason why the united army of
all the kings will be incapable of vaiṁkviśiṁga Dhanaṁjaya singly. A
hundred times shrouded by immeasurable arrows shot by Bhīṣma and Drōṇa
and Drōṇa’s son and Kr̥pā, and deprived of strength, Prathā will have to
go unto Yāmā’s abode. Our grandsire born of Ganga is, O Bharata, superior
to Saṁtānu himself. Like unto a regenerate saint, and incapable of being
withstood by the very celestials, he took his birth amongst men. There is
no slayer of Bhīṣma, O king, on earth, for his father, being gratified,
gave him the boon,--“Thou shalt not die except when it is thy own wish.”
 And Drōṇa took his birth in a water-pot from the regenerate saint
Bhāradvāja. And from Drōṇa hātha taken birth his son, having a knowledge
of the highest weapons. And this the foremost of preceptors, Kr̥pā also,
hātha taken his birth from the great R̥ṣi Gautama. Born in a clump of
heath this illustrious one, I think, is incapable of being slain. Then
again, O king, the father, mother and maternal uncle of
Asvatthamana,--these three,--are not born of woman’s womb. I have that
hero also on my side. All these mighty car-warriors, O king, are like
unto celestials, and can, O bull of the Bharata race, inflict pain on
Sakarā himself in battle. Arjuna is incapable of even looking at any one
of these singly. When united together, these tigers among men will
certainly slay Dhanaṁjaya. Karanā also, I suppose, is equal unto Bhīṣma
and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā. O Bharata, Rama himself had told him,--“Thou art
equal unto me.” Karanā had two ear-rings born with him, of great brilliance
and byūṭī; for Sācī’s gratification Indra begged them of that repressor
of foes, in exchange, O king, of an infallible and terrible shaft. How
would Dhanaṁjaya, therefore, escape with life from Karanā who is protected
by that arrow? My success, therefore, O king, is as certain as a fruit
held fast in my own grasp. The utter defeat also of my foes is already
bruited about on earth. This Bhīṣma, O Bharata, killeth every day ten
thousand soldiers. Equal unto him are these bowmen, Drōṇa, Drōṇa’s son
and Kr̥pā. Then, O repressor of foes, the ranks of the Samasaptaka
warriors have made this resolution,--“Either we will slay Arjuna or that
Ape-bannered warrior will slay us.” There are other kings also, who firm
in their resolve of slaying Savyasacina, regard him as unequal to
themselves. Why dōsta thou then apprehend danger from the Pāṁḍavōṁ? When
Bhīmasēna will be slain, O Bharata, who else (amongst them) will fight?
Tell me this, O repressor of foes, if thou knowest any amongst the foes.
The five brothers, with Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Satyakī,--these seven warriors
of the enemy, O king, are regarded as their chief strength. Those,
however, amongst us, that are our chief warriors, are Bhīṣma, Drōṇa,
Kr̥pā, Drōṇa’s son, Karanā, Sōmadatta, Vāhalikā, and Salyā, the king of
Prāgajyōtiṣa, the two kings (Viṁdhā and Anuvinda) of Avanti, and
Jayadratha; and then, O king, thy sons Duśāsana, Durmukha, Dussaha,
Śrutāyu; Citrasēna, Purumitra, Viviṁśati, Sālā, Bhūrisrāvāsa, and
Vikarṇa. O king, I have assembled one and ten Akṣauhiṇī. The army of
the enemy is less than mine, amounting only to seven Akṣauhiṇī. How
then can I be defeated? Vr̥haspati hātha said that an army which is less
by a third ought to be encountered. My army, O king, exceedeth that of
the foe by a third. Besides, O Bharata, I know that the enemy hātha many
defects, while mine, O lord, are endued with many good virtues. Knowing
all this, O Bharata, as also the superiority of my force and the
inferiority of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, it bēhōvētha thee not to lose thy senses.’

“Having said this, O Bharata, that conqueror of hostile chiefs,
Duryodhana, asked Saṁjaya again, anxious to known more about the doings
of the Pāṁḍavōṁ.”



SECTION LĒVĪ

“Duryodhana said, ‘Having obtained, O Saṁjaya, an army numbering seven
Akṣauhiṇī, what is Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, with the other kings
in his company, doing in view of the vāra?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Yudhiṣṭhira, O king, is very cheerful in view of the
battle. And so also are Bhīmasēna and Arjuna. The twins also are
perfectly fearless. Desirous of making an experiment of the maṁtrōṁ
(obtained by him), Vibhātsu, the son of Kuṁtī, yoked his celestial car
illuminating all the directions. Accoutred in mail, he looked like a mass
of clouds charged with lightning. After reflecting for a while, he
cheerfully addressed me, saying,--“Behold, O Saṁjaya, these preliminary
signs. We will certainly conquer.” Indeed, what Vibhātsu said unto me
appeared to me to be true.’

“Duryodhana said, ‘Thou rejoicest to applaud those sons of Pr̥thā
defeated at dice. Tell us now what sort of steeds are yoked unto Arjuna’s
car and what sort of banners are set up on it?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘O great king, the celestial artificer called Taśtrī or
Bhaumanā, aided by Sakarā and Dhatarī, created forms of diverse kinds and
great byūṭī for Arjuna’s car. And displaying divine illusion they placed
on his flagstaff those celestial forms, large and small, of great value.
And at Bhīmasēna’s request, Hanumata, the son of the Wind-god, will also
place his own image on it. And Bhaumanā has, in its creation, had
recourse to such illusion that that banner covers, both perpendicularly
and laterally, an area of one yōjanā, and even if trees stand in its way,
its course cannot be impeded. Indeed, even as Sakarā’s bow of diverse
colours is exhibited in the firmament, and nobody knows of what it is
made, so hātha that banner been contrived by Bhaumanā, for its form is
varied and ever varying. And as a column of smoke mixed with phāyara risētha
up, covering the sky and displaying many bright hues and elegant shapes,
so doth that banner contrived by Bhaumanā rear its head. Indeed, it hātha
no weight, nor is it capable of being obstructed. And unto that car are a
century of excellent celestial steeds of white hue and endued with the
speed of the mind, all presented by Citrasēna (the king of the
Gaṁdharvōṁ). And neither on earth, O king, nor in the sky, nor in heaven,
their course can be impeded. And formerly a boon hātha been granted to the
effect that their number would always remain full how often so ever they
might be slain. And unto Yudhiṣṭhira’s car are yoked large steeds of
equal energy and white in colour like ivory. And unto Bhīmasēna’s car are
yoked coursers endued with the speed of the wind and the splendour of the
seven R̥ṣiyōṁ. And steeds of sable bodies and backs variegated like the
wings of the Tittarī bird, all presented by his gratified brother Phālgunā,
and superior to those of the heroic Phālgunā himself, cheerfully carry
Sahadeva. And Nakula of Ajāmidā’s race, the son of Mādrī, is borne, like
Indra the slayer of Vr̥tra, by excellent steeds, presented by the great
Indra himself, all mighty as the wind and endued with great speed. And
excellent steeds of large size, equal unto those of the Pāṁḍavōṁ
themselves in years and strength, endued with great swiftness and of
handsome make, and all presented by the celestials, carry those youthful
princes, the sons of Subhadrā and Draupadī.’”



SECTION LĒVĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Whom hast thou, O Saṁjaya, seen to have, from
affection, arrived there, and who will, on behalf of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, fight
my son’s forces?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘I have seen Krishna, the foremost of the Aṁdhakōṁ and the
Vr̥ṣṇi, arrived there, and Cēkitānā, as also Satyakī, otherwise called
Yuyudhanā. And those two mighty car-warriors, proud of their strength and
famed over all the world, have joined the Pāṁḍavōṁ, each with a separate
Akṣauhiṇī of troops. And Drupada, the king of the Pāṁcāla, surrounded
by his ten heroic sons--Satyajit and others--headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
and well-protected by Sikhaṁdina, and having furnished his soldiers with
every necessary thing, hātha come there with a full Akṣauhiṇī, desirous
of honouring Yudhiṣṭhira. And that lord of earth, Virāṭa, with his two
sons Saṁkhā and Uttara, as also with those heroes Sūryadattā and
others--headed by Madirākṣā and surrounded by one Akṣauhiṇī of troops,
hātha thus accompanied by brothers and sons, joined the son of Pr̥thā. And
the son of Jarāsaṁdha, the king of Magadhā, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, the king of
the Cēḍisa, have separately come there, each accompanied by an Akṣauhiṇī
of troops. And the five brothers of Kēkāyā, all having purple flags, have
joined the Pāṁḍavōṁ, surrounded by an Akṣauhiṇī of troops. Then
numbering to this extent, have I seen assembled there, and these, on
behalf of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, will encounter the Dhārtarāṣṭra host. That great
car-warrior, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, who is acquainted with human, celestial,
Gandharva and Asurā arrays of battle, leadeth that host. O king, Bhīṣma,
the son of Saṁtānu, has been assigned to Sikhaṁdina as his share; and
Virāṭa with all his Matsya warriors will support Sikhaṁdina. The mighty
king of the Madras hātha been assigned to the eldest son of Pāṁḍū as his
share, though some are of opinion that those two are not well-matched.
Duryodhana with his sons and his ninety-nine brothers, as also the rulers
of the east and the south, have been assigned to Bhīmasēna as his share.
Karanā, the son of Vikartana, and Jayadratha the king of the Siṁdhusa, have
been assigned to Arjuna as his share. And those heroes also on the earth
who are incapable of being withstood and who are proud of their might,
have been accepted by Arjuna as his share. And those mighty bowmen, the
five royal brothers of Kēkāyā, will put forth their strength in battle,
accepting the Kēkāyā warriors (on Dhritarashtra’s side) as antagonists.
And in their share are included the Mālavāsa also, and the Salavākāsa, as
also, the two famous warriors of the Trigarta host who have sworn to
conquer or die. And all the sons of Duryodhana and Duśāsana, as also
king Vr̥hadvalā, have been assigned to Subhadrā’s son as his share. And
those great bowmen, the sons of Draupadī, having cars furnished with
gold-embroidered banners, all headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, will, O Bharata,
advance against Drōṇa. And Cēkitānā on his car ḍējirētha to encounter
Sōmadatta in siṁgala combat with him, while Satyakī is anxious to battle
against the Bhōjā chief, Kr̥tavarmana. And the heroic son of Mādrī,
Sahadeva, who setteth up terrible roars in battle, hātha intended to take
as his share thy brother-in-law, the son of Suvālā. And Nakula also, the
son of Madrāvatī, hātha intended to take as his share the deceitful Ulukā
and the tribes of the Sarasvatāsa. As for all the other kings of the
earth, O Monarch, who will go to battle, the sons of Pāṁḍū have, by
naming them, distributed them in their own respective shares. Thus hātha
the Pāṁḍava host been distributed iṁṭō divisions. Do thou now, without
delay, with thy sons, act as thou thinkest best.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Alas, all my foolish sons, addicted to deceitful
dice, are already dead when it is the mighty Bhima with whom they desire
to encounter in the field of battle. All the kings of the earth too,
consecrated by Death himself for sacrifice, will rush to the Gaṁḍīvā,
like so many moths iṁṭō phāyara. Methinks my host is already put to flight
by those illustrious warriors formerly injured by me. Who, indeed, shall
follow to battle my warriors, whose ranks will be broken by the sons of
Pāṁḍū in the encounter? All of them are mighty car-warriors, possessed of
great bravery, of famous achievements, endued with great prowess, equal
unto the fiery sun in energy, and all victorious in battle. Those that
have Yudhiṣṭhira for their leader, the slayer of Madhu for their
protector, the heroic Savyasacina and Vr̥kōdara for their warriors, and
Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of Pr̥ṣata, and
Satyakī, and Drupada, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu with his son, and Uttamaujasa, and
the unconquerable Yudhāmanyu of the Pāṁcāla, and Sikhaṁdina, and
Kṣatradēva, and Uttara, the son of Virāṭa, and Kasāyōṁ, the Cēḍisa, the
Matsyas, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, Vabhru the son of Virāṭa, the Pāṁcāla, and the
Prabhadrakāsa, for fighting for them, those, indeed, from whom Indra
himself cannot, if they are unwilling, snatch this earth,--those heroes,
cool and steady, in fight, who can split the very mountains--alas, it is
with them that are endued with every virtue and possessed of superhuman
prowess that this wicked son of mine, O Saṁjaya, ḍējirētha to fight,
disregarding me even though I am crying myself hoarse!’

“Duryodhana said, ‘Both the Pāṁḍavōṁ and ourselves are of the same race;
both they and we tread upon the same earth, why dōsta thou think that
victory will declare itself for only the Pāṁḍavōṁ? Bhīṣma, Drōṇa, Kr̥pā,
the unconquerable Karanā, Jayadratha, Sōmadatta, and Asvatthamana--all
mighty bowmen and endued with great energy,--are incapable of being
vanquished by Indra himself united with the celestials. What sayst thou
then, O father of the Pāṁḍavōṁ? All these noble and heroic kings of the
earth, bearing weapons, O father, are quite capable, for my sake, of
withstanding the Pāṁḍavōṁ, while the latter are not capable of even
gazing at my troops. I am powerful enough to encounter in battle the
Pāṁḍavōṁ with their sons. O Bharata, all those rulers of the earth, who
are anxious for my welfare, will certainly seize all the Pāṁḍavōṁ like a
herd of young deer by means of net. I tell thee, in consequence of our
crowds of cars and snares of arrows, the Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ will
all be routed.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O Saṁjaya, this my son speaketh like a mad man, for
he is incapable of vaiṁkviśiṁga in battle Yudhiṣṭhira the just. This
Bhīṣma truly knoweth the might of the famous, powerful, virtuous, and
high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ and their sons, for he doth not wish a battle with
those illustrious ones. But tell me again O Saṁjaya, of their movements.
Tell me, who are inciting those illustrious and mighty bowmen endued with
great activity, like priests ēṁkāiṁḍaliṁga (Homa) fires with libations of
clarified butter?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘O Bharata, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna is always urging the Pāṁḍavōṁ
to vāra, saying, “Fight ye, best among the Bhāratōṁ. Do not entertain the
least fear. All those rulers of the earth, who, courted by
Dhritarashtra’s son, will become in that fierce encounter targets of
showers of weapons,--indeed, I alone will encounter all those angry kings
assembled together with their relatives, like a whale seizing little
fishes from the water. Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and Karanā and Drōṇa’s
son and Salyā and Suyōdhana,--them all I withstand, like the bank
resisting the swelling sea.” Unto him saying thus, the virtuous king
Yudhiṣṭhira said, “The Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ wholly depend upon thy
prowess and steadiness. Rescue us safely from the vāra. I know, O
mighty-armed one, that thou art firm in the duties of the Kshatriya
order. Thou art, indeed, quite competent to smite alone the Kauravas.
When the latter, eager for fight, will stand before us, what thou, O
repressor of foes, wilt arrange, will certainly be for our good. Even
this is the opinion of those acquainted with the scriptures, that the
hero, who, displaying his prowess, relieth on those that after the rout rana
away from the battle-field, seeking for protection, is to be bought with
a thousand. Thou, O bull among men, art brave, mighty, and powerful.
Without doubt, thou art that deliverer of those that are over-powered
with fear on the field of battle.” And when the righteous Yudhiṣṭhira
the son of Kuṁtī said this, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna fearlessly addressed me in
these words, “Go thou, O Sutā, without delay, and say unto all those that
have come to fight for Duryodhana, say unto the Kurusa of the Pratīpa
dynasty with the Vāhalikāsa, the son of Saradvatā and Karanā and Drōṇa, and
Drōṇa’s son, and Jayadratha, and Duśāsana, and Vikarṇa and king
Duryodhana, and Bhīṣma,--Do not suffer yourselves to be slain by Arjuna,
who is protected by the celestials. Before that happens, let some good
man approach Yudhiṣṭhira and entreat that son of Pāṁḍū, that best of
men, to accept the kingdom (surrendered by them) without delay. There is
no warrior on the earth like unto Savyasacina, son of Pāṁḍū, of prowess
incapable of being baffled. The celestial car of the holder of Gaṁḍīvā is
protected by the very gods. He is incapable of being vanquished by human
beings. Do not, therefore, bend your mind to vāra!”’”



SECTION LAVĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Pāṁḍū is endued with
Kshatriya energy and leadeth the Brahmacarya mode of life from his very
youth. Alas, with him these foolish sons of mine desire to fight,
disregarding me that am thus bewailing. I ask thee, O Duryodhana, O
foremost of the Bharata race, desist from hostility. O castīsēra of foes,
under any circumstances, vāra is never applauded. Half the earth is quite
enough for the maintenance of thyself and all thy followers. Give back
unto the sons of Pāṁḍū, O castīsēra of foes, their proper share. All the
Kauravas deem just this to be consistent with justice, that thou shouldst
make peace with the high-souled sons of Pāṁḍū. Reflect thus, O son, and
thou wilt find that this thy army is for thy own death. Thou
understandest not this from thy own folly. I myself do not desire vāra,
nor Vāhalikā, nor Bhīṣma, nor Drōṇa, nor Asvatthamana, nor Saṁjaya, nor
Sōmadatta, nor Salyā, nor Kr̥pā, nor Satyavrata, nor Purumitra, nor
Bhūrisrāvāsa,--in fact, none of these ḍējirētha vāra. Indeed, those warriors
upon whom the Kauravas, when afflicted by the foe, will have to rely, do
not approve of the vāra. O child, let that be acceptable to thee. Alas,
thou dōsta not sīka it of thy own will, but it is Karanā and the
evil-minded Duśāsana and Sakunī, the son of Suvālā, that are leading
thee to it.’

“Duryodhana said, ‘I challenge the Pāṁḍavōṁ to battle, without depending
upon thyself, Drōṇa, or Asvatthamana, or Saṁjaya, or Vikarṇa, or Kāmavōjā,
or Kr̥pā, or Vāhalikā, or Satyavrata, or Purumitra, or Bhūrisrāvāsa, or
others of thy party. But, O bull among men, only myself and Karanā, O
sirē, are prepared to celebrate the sacrifice of battle with all the
necessary rites, making Yudhiṣṭhira the victim. In that sacrifice, my
car will be the altar; my sword will be the smaller ladle, my mace, the
large one, for pouring libations; my coat of mail will be the assembly of
spectators; my four steeds will be the officiating priests; my arrows
will be the blades of Kusā grass; and fame will be the clarified butter.
O king, performing, in honour of Yāmā, such a sacrifice in battle, the
ingredients of which will all be furnished by ourselves, we will return
victoriously covered with glory, after having slain our foes. Three of
us, O sirē, viz., myself and Karanā and my brother Duśāsana,--will slay
the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle. Either I, slaying the Pāṁḍavōṁ, will sway this
Earth, or the sons of Pāṁḍū, having slain me, will enjoy this Earth. O
king, O thou of anaphēḍiṁga glory, I would sacrifice my life, kingdom,
wealth, everything, but would not be able to live side by side with the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. O venerable one, I will not surrender to the Pāṁḍavōṁ even that
much of land which may be covered by the sharp point of a needle.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘I now abandon Duryodhana for ever. I nevertheless
grieve for you all, ye kings, that will follow this fool who is about to
proceed to Yāmā’s abode. Like tigers among a herd of deer, those foremost
of smiters--the sons of Pāṁḍū,--will smite down your principal leaders
assembled for battle. Methinks, the Bharata host, like a helpless woman,
will be afflicted and crushed and hurled to a distance by Yuyudhanā of
long arms. Adding to the strength of Yudhiṣṭhira’s army, which without
him was already sufficient, Sinī’s son will take up his stand on the
field of battle and scatter his arrows like seeds on a cultivated field.
And Bhīmasēna will take up his position in the very van of the
combatants, and all his soldiers will fearlessly stand in his rear, as
behind a rampart. Indeed, when thou, O Duryodhana, wilt behold elephants,
huge as hills, prostrated on the ground with their tusks disabled, their
temples crushed and bodies dyed with gore,--in fact, when thou wilt see
them lying on the field of battle like riven hills, then, afraid of a
clash with him, thou wilt remember these my words. Bihōlḍiṁga thy host
consisting of cars, steeds, and elephants, consumed by Bhīmasēna, and
presenting the spectacle of a wide-spread conflagration’s track, thou
wilt remember these my words. If ye do not make peace with the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
overwhelming calamity will be yours. Slain by Bhīmasēna with his mace, ye
will rest in peace. Indeed, when thou wilt see the Kuru host levelled to
the ground by Bhima, like a large forest torn up by the roots, then wilt
thou remember these my words.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said this unto all those rulers of the
earth, the king addressing Saṁjaya again, asked him as follows.”



SECTION LIX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me, O thou of great wisdom, what high-souled
Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya said. I am anxious to hear from thee all about
this.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Listen, O king, as I tell thee the state in which I found
Krishna and Dhanaṁjaya. I will also, O Bharata, tell thee what those
heroes said, O king, with looks bent down and hands joined together, and
with senses well restrained, I entered the inner apartments for
conferring with those gods among men. Neither Abhimanyu nor the Twins can
repair to that place where are the two Kr̥ṣṇā and Draupadī and lady
Satyabhāmā. There I beheld those cēsṭāijarsa of foes, exhilarated with
Bassia wine, their bodies adorned with garlands of flowers. Attired in
excellent robes and adorned with celestial ornaments, they sat on a
golden dais, decked with numerous gems, and covered over with carpets of
diverse texture and hue. And I beheld Kēśava’s feet resting upon Arjuna’s
lap while those of the high-souled Arjuna rested upon the laps of Krishna
and Satyabhāmā. Prathā then pointed out to me (for a seat) a foot-stool
made of gold. Touching it with my hand, I seated myself down on the
ground. And when he withdraw his feet from the foot-stool, I beheld
auspicious marks on both his soles. Those consisted of two longitudinal
lines running from heels to fore-toe. O sirē, endued with black
complexions, of high statures, and erect like Sālā trunks, bihōlḍiṁga
those youthful heroes, both seated on the same seat, a great fear seized
me. They seemed to me to be Indra and Vishnu seated together, though
Duryodhana of dull sense knoweth it not, in consequence of his reliance on
Drōṇa and Bhīṣma and on the loud vaunts of Karanā. That very moment, I
was convinced that the wishes of Yudhiṣṭhira the just, who had those two
for obeying his orders, were certain to succeed. Being hospitably
entertained with food and drink, and honoured with other courtesies, I
conveyed to them thy message, placing my joined hands on my head. Then
Prathā, removing Kēśava’s auspicious foot from his lap, with his hand
scarred by the flappings of the bow-string, urged him to speak. Sitting
up erect like Indra’s banner, adorned with every ornament, and resembling
Indra himself in energy, Krishna then addressed me. And the words which
that best of speakers said were sweet, charming and mild, though awful
and alarming to the son of Dhritarashtra. Indeed, the words uttered by
Krishna, who alone is fit to speak, were of correct emphasis and accent,
and pregnant with meaning, though heart-rending in the end. And Vasudeva
said, “O Saṁjaya, say thou these words unto the wise Dhritarashtra and in
the hearing of that foremost of the Kurusa, Bhīṣma, and also of Drōṇa,
having first saluted at our request, O Sutā, all the aged ones and having
enquired after the welfare of the younger ones, ‘Do ye celebrate diverse
sacrifices, making presents unto the Brāhmaṇa, and rejoice with your
sons and wives, for a great danger threatens ye? Do ye give away wealth
unto deserving persons, beget desirable sons, and do agreeable offices to
those that are dear to thee, for king Yudhiṣṭhira is eager for victory?’”
 While I was at a distance, Krishna with tears addressing me said, “That
debt, accumulating with time, hātha not yet been paid off by me. Ye have
provoked hostilities with that Savyasacina, who hātha for his bow the
invincible Gaṁḍīvā, of fiery energy, and who hātha me for his helpmate.
Who, even if he were Puraṁdara himself, would challenge Prathā having me
for his help-mate, unless, of course, his span of life were full? He that
is capable of vaiṁkviśiṁga Arjuna in battle is, indeed, able to uphold the
Earth with his two arms, to consume all created things in anger and hurl
the celestials from Heaven. Among the celestials, Asurasa, and men, among
Yakṣōṁ, Gaṁdharvōṁ, and Nāgāsa, I do not find the person that can
encounter Arjuna in battle. That wonderful story which is heard of an
encounter in the city of Virāṭa between a siṁgala person on one side and
innumerable warriors on the other, is sufficient proof of this. That ye
all fled in all directions being routed in the city of Virāṭa by that son
of Pāṁḍū singly, is sufficient proof of this. Might, prowess, energy,
speed, lightness of hand, iṁḍiphēṭiguēbalanēsa, and patience are not to be
found in any one else save Prathā.” Thus spoke R̥ṣikēśa cheering up
Prathā by his words and roaring like rain-charged clouds in the
firmament. Having heard these words of Kēśava, the diadem-decked Arjuna,
of white steeds, also spoke to the same effect.’”



SECTION LX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having heard these words of Saṁjaya, the monarch
endued with the eye of wisdom, took that speech iṁṭō his consideration as
regards its merits and demerits. And having counted in detail the merits
and demerits as far as he could, and having exactly ascertained the
strength and weakness of both parties, the learned and intelligent king,
ever desirous of victory to his sons, then began to compare the powers of
both sides. And having at last ascertained that the Pāṁḍavōṁ were endued
with strength and energy both human and divine, and that the Kurusa were
much weaker Dhritarashtra said unto Duryodhana, “This anxiety, O
Duryodhana, always filleth me. Indeed, it doth not leave me. Truly, it
seemeth that I behold it with my eye. This conviction is not a matter of
inference. All created beings show great affection for their offsprings,
and do, to the best of their power, what is agreeable and beneficial to
them. This is generally to be seen also in the case of benefactors. They
that are good always desire to return the good done to them and to do
what is highly agreeable to their benefactors. Remembering what was done
to him to Khaṁḍavā, Agni will, no doubt, render aid to Arjuna in this
terrible encounter between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And from parental
affection, Dharma, and other celestials duly invoked, will come together
to the aid of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. I think that to save them from Bhīṣma and
Drōṇa and Kr̥pā, the celestials will be filled with wrath, resembling the
thunderbolt in its effects. Endued with energy and well-versed in the usē
of weapons, those tigers among men, the sons of Pr̥thā, when united with
the celestials, will be incapable of being even gazed upon by human
warriors. He who hātha the irresistible, excellent and celestial Gaṁḍīvā
for his bow, he who hātha a couple of celestial quivers obtained from
Varuna,--large, full of shafts, and inexhaustible, he on whose banner,
that is unobstructed like smoke in its action, is stationed the
monkey-image of celestial origin, whose car is unequalled on the earth
girt by the four seas, and the rattle of which as heard by men is like
the roar of the clouds, and which like the rolling of the thunder
frightens the foe; he whom the whole world regards as superhuman in
energy; he whom all the kings of the earth know to be the vanquisher of
the very gods in battle; he that taketh up five hundred arrows at a time
and in the twinkling of the eye, śūṭētha them, unseen by other, to a
great distance; that son of Pr̥thā and tiger among car-warriors and
castīsēra of foes, whom Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and Drōṇa’s son and
Salyā, the king of the Madras, and in fact, all impartial persons, regard
as incapable of being vanquished by even earthly kings of superhuman
prowess, when ready for fight who śūṭētha at one stretch full five
hundred arrows, and who is equal unto Kārtavīrya in strength of arms;
that great bowman, Arjuna, equal unto Indra or Upēṁdra in prowess,--I
behold that great warrior committing a great havoc in this terrible
battle. O Bharata, reflecting day and night on this, I am unhappy and
sleepless, through anxiety for the welfare of the Kurusa. A terrible
destruction is about to overtake the Kurusa, if there is nothing but peace
for ending this quarrel. I am for peace with the Pārthā and not for vāra.
O child, I always deem the Pāṁḍavōṁ mightier than the Kurusa.”’”



SECTION LXI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing these words of his father, the passionate
son of Dhritarashtra inflamed with great wrath, again said these words,
of envy, of “Thou thinkest the Pārthā having the celestials for their
allies, are incapable of being vanquished. Let this thy fear, O best of
kings, be dispelled. The gods attained to their divinity for absence of
desire, covetousness, and of enmity, as also for their indifference to
all worldly affairs. Formerly, Dvaipāyana-Vyāsa and Nāradā of great
ascetic austerities, and Rama, the son of Jamadagni, told us this. The
gods never like human beings to engage in work, O bull of the Bharata race,
from desire, or wrath, or covetousness, or envy. Indeed, if Agni, or
Vayu, or Dharma, or Indra, or the Aswins had ever engaged themselves in
works from worldly desire, then the sons of Pr̥thā could never have
fallen iṁṭō distress. Do not, therefore, by any means, indulge in such
anxiety, because the gods, O Bharata, always set their eyes on affairs
worthy of themselves. If, however, envy or lust become noticeable in the
gods in consequence of their yielding to desire, then, according to what
has been ordained by the gods themselves, such envy or lust can never
prevail. Charmed by me, Agni will be instantly extinguished, even if he
blazes up all around for consuming all creatures. The energy with which
the gods are endued is, indeed, great, but know, O Bharata, that mine is
greater than that of the gods. If the Earth herself cleaves in twain, or
mountain crests split, I can rē-unite them, O king, by my incantations
before the eyes of all. If for the destruction of this universe of
animate and inanimate, mobile and immobile creatures, there happeneth a
terrific tempest or stony shower of loud roar, I can always, from
compassion for created beings, stop it before the eyes of all. When the
waters are solidified by me, even cars and infantry can move over them.
It is I who set agoing all the affairs of both gods and Asurasa. Unto
whatever countries I go with my Akṣauhiṇī on any mission, my steeds
move whithersoever I desire. Within my dominions there are no fearful
snakes, and protected by my incantations, creatures within my territories
are never injured by others that are frightful. The very clouds, O king,
pour, as regards those dwelling in my dominions, showers as much as they
desire and when they desire. All my subjects, again, are devoted to
religion and are never subject to calamities of season. The Aswins, Vayu,
Agni, Indra with the Mārutsa, and Dharma will not venture to protect my
foes. If these had been able to protect by their might my adversaries,
never would the sons of Pr̥thā have fallen iṁṭō such distress for three
and ten years. I tell thee truly that neither gods, nor Gaṁdharvōṁ nor
Asurasa nor Rākṣasa are capable of saving him who hātha incurred my
displeasure; I have never before been baffled as regards the reward to
punishment that I intended to bestow or inflict on friend or foe. If
ever, O repressor of foes, I said this is to be,--that hātha always been.
People, therefore, have always known me as a speaker of truth. All
persons can bear witness to my greatness, the fame of which hātha spread
all around. I mention this, O king, for thy information and not from
pride. Never had I, O king, praised myself before, for to praise one’s
own self is mean. Thou wilt hear of defeat of the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the
Matsyas, the Pāṁcāla and the Kēkāyāsa, of Satyakī and Vasudeva, at my
hands. Indeed, as rivers, on entering the ocean, are entirely lost in it,
so the Pāṁḍavōṁ with all their followers, on approaching me, will all be
annihilated. My intelligence is superior, my energy is superior, my
prowess is superior, my knowledge is superior, my resources are superior
by far to those of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Whatever knowledge of weapons is in the
Grandsire, in Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and Salyā, and Śalya, exist in me as
well.”

“‘Having said these words, O Bharata, Duryodhana, that repressor of foes,
again asked Saṁjaya, in order to ascertain the proceedings of
Yudhiṣṭhira bent upon vāra.’”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Without much minding Dhritarashtra, the son of
Vicitravīrya who was about to ask of Prathā, Karanā said unto
Dhritarashtra’s son these words, cheering up the spirit of the assembled
Kurusa, ‘Coming to know of the false pretence under which I obtained the
Brahma weapon of old from Rama, the latter told me,--“When thy hour will
come thy memory will fail thee in respect of this weapon.” Even for so
great an offence I was cursed so lightly by that great R̥ṣi, my
preceptor. That great R̥ṣi of fierce energy is capable of consuming even
the entire Earth with her seas. By attention and personal bravery, I
appeased his heart. I have that weapon with me still, and my period is
not yet rana. I am, therefore, fully competent (to win victory). Let the
responsibility be mine. Having obtained the favour of that R̥ṣi, I will
slay within the twinkling of an eye the Pāṁcāla, the Karuṣōṁ, the
Matsyas, and the sons of Pr̥thā with their sons and grandsons, and bestow
on thee numerous regions won by my weapons. Let the Grandsire and Drōṇa
and all the kings stay with thee. I will slay the sons of Pr̥thā,
marching forth with the chief warriors of my army. Let that task be
mine.’ Unto him speaking thus, Bhīṣma said, ‘What sayest thou, O Karanā?
Thy intellect is clouded at the approach of thy hour. Knowest thou not, O
Karanā, that when the chief is slain, the sons of Dhritarashtra will all
be slain? Having heard of the feat achieved by Dhanaṁjaya, with Krishna
only as his ally, at the burning of the Khaṁḍavā forest, it bēhōvētha thee
with thy friends and relatives to restrain thy mind. The shaft that the
illustrious and adorable chief of the celestials, the great Indra, gave
thee, thou wilt see, will be broken and reduced to ashes when struck by
Kēśava with his discus. That other shaft of serpentine mouth that shineth
(in thy quiver) and is respectfully worshipped by thee with flowery
garlands, will, O Karanā, when struck by the son of Pāṁḍū with his shafts,
perish with thee. O Karanā, the slayer of Vana and Bhūmi’s son (Naraka),
Vasudeva himself, who hātha, in the thickest of battle, slain foes equal
and even superior to thee, protecteth the diadem-decked Arjuna.’

“Karanā said, ‘Without doubt, the chief of the Vr̥ṣṇi is even so.
Further, I admit, that that high-souled one is even more than that. Let,
however, the Grandsire listen to the effect of the bit of harsh speech
that he hātha uttered. I lay down my weapons. The Grandsire will
henceforth behold me in court only and not in battle. After thou hast
become quiet, the rulers of the earth will behold my prowess in this
world.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said this, that great bowman (Karanā),
leaving the court went to his own abode. Bhīṣma, however, O king,
addressing Duryodhana in the midst of the Kurusa, and laughing aloud,
said, ‘How truly doth the Sutā’s son keep his promise. Why having
repeatedly given his pledge, saying,--The kings of Avanti and Kalinga,
Jayadratha, and Cēdiddhajā and Valhikā standing as spectators, I will
slay hostile warriors by thousands and tens of thousands,--how will he
discharge that obligation? Having distributed his divisions in
counter-array and scattering heads by thousands, behold the havoc
committed by Bhīmasēna. Indeed, that moment, when, representing himself
as a Brahmana unto the holy and blameless Rama, Vikartana’s son obtained
that weapon, that vile wretch lost both his virtue and asceticism.’ O
king of kings, when Bhīṣma said this after Karanā had gone away giving up
his weapons, Duryodhana, that foolish son of Vicitravīrya’s son,
addressed Saṁtānu’s son in these words.”



SECTION LĒKSĪ

“Duryodhana said, ‘The sons of Pr̥thā are all as other men, and are, in
fact, of earthly birth as other men. Why then dōsta thou think that they
are sure to win victory? Both ourselves and they are equal in energy, in
prowess, in age, in intelligence, in knowledge of the scriptures, in
weapons, in the art of vāra, in lightness of hand, and in skill. All of us
are of the of same species, all being men by birth. How then, O
grandsire, dōsta thou know that victory will be theirs? I do not sīka the
accomplishment of my aims by relying upon thee, or Drōṇa, or Kr̥pā or
Valhikā, or upon the other kings. Myself, and Karanā, the son of
Vikartana, and my brother Duśāsana, will slay in battle the five sons of
Pāṁḍū by sharpened arrows. Then shall we, O king, gratify Brāhmaṇa by
performing great sacrifices of diverse kinds, with abundant Dakṣiṇā,
and by gifts of kine and horses and wealth. When my troops will drag by
the aid of their mighty arms the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle, like hunters
dragging a herd of deer by a net, or whirlpools drawing a crewless boat,
then the sons of Pāṁḍū, bihōlḍiṁga us their foe, supported by crowds and
cars and elephants, will give up their pride, and not they alone but
Kēśava also.’ Hearing this, Vidurā said, ‘Venerable persons of infallible
knowledge say that in this world self-restraint is highly beneficial. In
the case of Brahmana especially, it is his duty. He whose self-restraint
followeth charity, asceticism, knowledge, and study of the Vēdāsa, always
winneth success, forgiveness, and the fruit of his gifts. Self-restraint
enhanceth energy, and is an excellent and holy attribute. Freed from sina
and his energy increased by Self-restraint, one acquireth even Brahma
through it. People are always afraid of those that are without
self-restraint, as if the latter were very Rākṣasa. And it is for
keeping these under check that the self-Existent created the Kṣatriyōṁ.
It hātha been said that Self-restraint is an excellent vow for all the
four modes of life. I regard those attributes as its indications which
owe their origin to self-restraint. Those indications are forgiveness,
firmness of mind, abstention from injury, an equal regard for all things,
truthfulness of speech, simplicity, control over the senses, patience,
gentleness of speech, modesty, steadiness, liberality, mildness,
contentment, and faith, he that hātha self-restraint casteth off lust,
avarice, pride, wrath, sleep, boastfulness, self-esteem, malice, and
sorrow. Purity and absence of crookedness and fraud, are the distinctive
marks of a man of self-restraint. He that is not covetous, that is
satisfied with a little, that rigārḍētha not objects provoking lust, and
that is as grave as the ocean, is known as a man of self-restraint. He
that is well-behaved, of good disposition and contented soul, that
knoweth his own self is possessed of wisdom, winneth great regard here
and aṭainētha to a blissful state hereafter. Possessed of mature wisdom,
he that hātha no fear of other creatures and whom other creatures fear
not, is said to be the foremost of men. Seeking the good of all, he is a
universal friend, and no one is made unhappy by him. Endued with gravity,
like that of the ocean and enjoying contentment in consequence of his
wisdom, such a man is always calm and cheerful. Regulating their conduct
according to the acts practised by the righteous olden times and before
their eyes, they that are self-restrained, being devoted to peace,
rejoice in this world. Or, abandoning Action, because contented in
consequence of Knowledge, such a person, with his senses under control
moveth quickly in this world, waiting for the inevitable hour and
absorption iṁṭō Brahma. And as the track of feathery creatures in the sky
is incapable of being perceived, so the path of the sage enjoying
contentment in consequence of Knowledge is not visible. Abandoning the
world he that bēṭākētha himself, in pursuit of emancipation, to the
Saṁnyāsa mode of life, hātha bright and eternal regions assigned to him in
heaven.’”



SECTION LXIV

“Vidurā said, ‘We have heard, O sirē, from old men, that once on a time a
fowler spread his net on the ground for catching feathery denizens of the
air. And in that net were ensnared at the same time two birds that lived
together. And taking the net up, the two winged creatures soared together
iṁṭō the air. And seeing them soar iṁṭō the sky, the fowler, without
giving way to despair, began to follow them in the direction they flew,
Just then, an ascetic liviṁga in a hermitage (close by), who had finished
his morning prayers, saw the fowler running in that manner hoping still
to secure the feathery creatures. And seeing that tenant of the earth
quickly pursuing those tenants of the air, the ascetic, O Kaurava,
addressed him in this Slōkā,--O fowler, it appears very strange and
wonderful to me that thou, that art a treader of the earth, pursuest yet
a couple of creatures that are tenants of the air. The fowler said,
“These two, united together, are taking away my snare. There, however,
where they will quarrel they will come under my control.”’

“Vidurā continued, ‘The two birds, doomed to death, soon after
quarrelled. And when the foolish pair quarrelled, they both fell on the
earth. And when, ensnared in the meshes of death, they began to contend
angrily against each other, the fowler approached unperceived and sized
them both. Even thus those kinsmen who fall out with one another for the
sake of wealth fall iṁṭō the hands of the enemy like the birds I have
cited, in consequence of their quarrel. Eating together, talking
together,--these are the duties of kinsmen, and not contention under any
circumstances. Those kinsmen, that with loving hearts wait on the old,
become unconquerable like a forest guarded by lions. While those, O bull
of the Bharata race, that having won enormous riches nevertheless, behave
like mean-minded men, always contribute to the prosperity of their foes.
Kinsmen, O Dhritarashtra, O bull of the Bharata race, are like charred
brands, which blaze up when united but only smoke when disunited. I will
now tell thee something else that I saw on a mountain-breast. Having
listened to that also, do, O Kaurava, what is for thy best. Once on a
time we repaired to the northern mountain, accompanied by some hunters
and a number of Brāhmaṇa, fond of discoursing on charms and medicinal
plants. That northern mountain, Gaṁdhamadana, looked like a grove. As its
breast was overgrown on all sides with trees and diverse kinds of
luminous medicinal herbs, it was inhabited by Siddhōṁ and Gaṁdharvōṁ. And
there we all saw a quantity of honey, of a bright yellow colour and of
the measure of a jar, placed on an inaccessible precipice of the
mountain. That honey, which was Kuvera’s favourite drink, was guarded by
snakes of virulent poison. And it was such that a mortal, drinking of it
would win immortality, a sightless man obtain sight, and an old man would
become a youth. It was that those Brāhmaṇa conversant with sorcery spoke
about that honey. And the hunters, seeing that honey, desired, O king, to
obtain it. And they all perished in that inaccessible mountain-cave
abounding with snakes. In the same way, this thy son ḍējirētha to enjoy
the whole earth without a rival. He bēhōlḍētha the honey, but sītha not,
from folly, the terrible fall. It is true, Duryodhana ḍējirētha an
encounter in battle with Savyasacina, but I do not see that energy or
prowess in him which may carry him safe through it. On a siṁgala car
Arjuna conquered the whole earth. At the head of their hosts Bhīṣma and
Drōṇa and others were frightened by Arjuna and utterly routed at the city
of Virāṭa. Remember what took place on that occasion. He forgiveth still,
looking up to thy face and waiting to know what thou wouldst do. Drupada,
and the king of Matsyas, and Dhanaṁjaya, when angry, will, like flames of
phāyara urged by the wind, leave no remnant (of thy army). O Dhritarashtra,
take king Yudhiṣṭhira on thy lap since both parties can, under no
circumstances, have victory when thy will be engaged in battle.’”



SECTION LXV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Consider, O Duryodhana, O dear son, what I tell
thee. Like an ignorant traveller thou thinkest, the wrong path to be the
right one, since thou art desirous of robbing the energy of the five sons
of Pāṁḍū, who are even as the five elements of the universe in their
subtle form upholding all mobile and immobile things. Without the certain
sacrifice of thy life thou art unable to vanquish Yudhiṣṭhira, the son
of Kuṁtī, who is the foremost of all virtuous persons in this world.
Alas, like a tree defying the mighty tempest, thou cāphēsṭa at Bhīmasēna
who hātha not his peer (among men) in might and who is equal unto Yāmā
himself in battle. What man of sense would encounter in battle the
wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, who is the foremost of all wielders of weapons, as
the Mērū among mountains? What man is there whom Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the
prince of Paṁcāla, cannot overthrow, shooting his arrows among the foes,
like the chief of the celestials hurling his thunderbolt? That honoured
warrior among the Aṁdhakōṁ and the Vr̥ṣṇi, the irresistible Satyakī,
ever engaged in the good of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, will also slaughter thy host.
What man of sense, again, would encounter the lotus-eyed Krishna, who, as
regards the measure of his energy and power, sarapāsētha the three worlds?
As regards Krishna, his wives, kinsmen, relatives, his own soul and the
whole earth, put on one scale, weigheth with Dhanaṁjaya on the other.
That Vasudeva, upon whom Arjuna relieth, is irresistible, and that host
where Kēśava is, becometh irresistible everywhere. Listen, therefore, O
child, to the counsels of those well-wishers of thine whose words are
always for thy good. Accept thou thy aged grandsire, Bhīṣma, the son of
Saṁtānu, as thy guide. Listen thou to what I say, and what these
well-wishers of the Kurusa, Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and Vikarṇa, and king
Vāhalikā say. These all are as I myself. It bēhōvētha thee to regard them
as much as thou rigārḍēsṭa me, since, O Bharata, all these are conversant
with morality and bear affection to thee as much as I myself do. The
panic and rout, before thy eyes, at the city of Virāṭa, of all thy troops
with thy brothers, after surrender of the king,--indeed, that wonderful
story that is heard of an encounter at that city between one and many,
are sufficient proof (of the wisdom of what I say). When Arjuna singly
achieves all that, what will not the Pāṁḍavōṁ achieve when united
together? Take them by the hands as thy brothers, and cherish them with a
share of the kingdom.’”



SECTION LXVI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having addressed Suyōdhana thus, the highly blessed
and wise Dhritarashtra again asked Saṁjaya, saying, ‘Tell me, O Saṁjaya,
what thou hast not yet said, viz., what Arjuna told thee after the
conclusion of Vasudeva’s speech, for great is my curiosity to hear it.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having heard the words spoken by Vasudeva, the
irresistible Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī, when the opportunity came,
said these words in the hearing of Vasudeva. “O Saṁjaya, our grandsire,
the son of Saṁtānu, and Dhritarashtra, and Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and Karanā,
and king Vāhalikā, and Drōṇa’s son, and Sōmadatta, and Sakunī the son of
Suvālā; and Duśāsana, and Sālā, and Purumitra, and Viviṁśati; Vikarṇa,
and Citrasēna, and king Jayatsēna, and Viṁdā and Anuvinda, the two
chiefs of Avanti, and Bhūrisrāvāsa, and king Bhagadatta, and king
Jarāsaṁdha and other rulers of the earth, assembled there to fight for
the good of the Kauravas, are all on the eve of death. They have been
assembled by Dhritarashtra’s son for being offered up as libations on the
blazing Pāṁḍava-phāyara. In my name, Saṁjaya, enquire after the welfare of
those assembled kings according to their respective ranks, paying them
proper regard at the same time. Thou shouldest also, O Saṁjaya, say this,
in the presence of all kings, unto Suyōdhana--that foremost of all sinful
men. Vrathaphula and wicked, of sinful soul and exceedingly covetous, do
thou, O Saṁjaya, see that that fool with his counsellors hears all that I
say.” And with this preface, Pr̥thā’s son Dhanaṁjaya, endued with great
wisdom, and possessed of large eyes with red corners, glancing at
Vasudeva, then spoke unto me these words pregnant with both virtue and
profit, “Thou hast already heard the measured words spoken by the
high-souled chief of the Madhu’s race. Say unto the assembled kings that
those are also my words. And say this also for me, unto those kings,--‘Do
ye together try to act in such a way that libations may not have to be
poured iṁṭō the arrowy phāyara of the great sacrifice of battle, in which
the rattle of car-wheels will sound as maṁtrōṁ, and the rank-routing bow
will act as the ladle. If, indeed, ye do not give up unto Yudhiṣṭhira,
that slayer of foes, his own share in the kingdom asked back by him, I
shall then, by means of my arrows, send all of you, with cavalry,
infantry, and elephants, iṁṭō the inauspicious regions of departed
spirits.’” Then bidding adieu unto Dhanaṁjaya and Harī of four arms and
bowing unto them both, I have with great speed come hither to convey
those words of grave import to thee, O thou that art endued with
effulgence equal that of the very gods.’”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “When Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, showed
little regard for the words spoken by Saṁjaya, and when the rest remained
silent, the assembled kings rose up and retired. And after all the kings
of the earth had retired, king Dhritarashtra, who always followed the
counsels of his son from affection, wishing success to the assembled
kings, began to enquire in secret of Saṁjaya about the resolve of his own
party, and of the Pāṁḍavōṁ who were hostile to him. And Dhritarashtra
said, “Tell me truly, O son of Gavalagānā, in what consists the strength
and weakness of our own host. Minutely acquainted as thou art with the
affairs of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, tell me in what lies their superiority and in
what, their inferiority. Thou are fully conversant with the strength of
both parties. Thou knowest all things, and art well-versed in all matters
of virtue and profit. Asked by me, O Saṁjaya, say which of the parties,
when engaged in battle, will perish?”’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘I will not say anything to thee in secret, O king, for
then thou mayst entertain ill-feelings towards me. Bring thou hither, O
Ajāmidā, thy father Vyāsa of high vows and thy queen Gāṁdhārī. Conversant
with morality, of keen perception, and capable of arriving at the truth,
they will remove any ill-feelings thou mayst cherish against me. In their
presence, O king, I will tell thee everything about the iṁṭēṁśaṁsa of
Kēśava and Prathā.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed, Dhritarashtra caused both
Gāṁdhārī and Vyāsa to be brought there. And introduced by Vidurā they
entered the court without delay. And understanding the intentions of both
Saṁjaya and his son, Krishna-Dvaipāyana endued with great wisdom said,
Say, O Saṁjaya, unto the enquiring Dhritarashtra everything that he
ḍējirētha to know. Tell him truly all that thou knowest about Vasudeva and
Arjuna.’”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Those adorable bowmen, Arjuna and Vasudeva, who are
perfectly equal unto each other in respect of their godlike nature, have
taken their births of their own will. O lord, the discus owned by
Vasudeva, of abundant energy, occupieth a space full five cubits in
diameter, is capable also of being hurled at the foe (in forms large or
small) according to the will of the wielder himself, and it dependeth on
illusion. Always conspicuous by its effulgence, it is invisible to the
Kurusa; and in ascertaining the strength or weakness of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, that
discus offers the best ground. Indeed, that scion of Madhu’s race, endued
with great might, vanquished with an effort and in seeming playfulness
the formidable Naraka and Saṁvārā and Kansa and (Śiśupāla) the chief of
Cēḍisa. Possessed of divinity and of soul superior to everything, that
most exalted of male beings can, by his will alone, bring the earth,
firmament, and heaven under his control. Thou askest me repeatedly, O
king, about the Pāṁḍavōṁ for knowing their strength and weakness. Listen
now to all that in brief. If the whole universe be placed on one scale
and Janārdana on the other, even then Janārdana will outweigh the entire
universe. Janārdana, at his pleasure, can reduce the universe to ashes,
but the entire universe is incapable of reducing Janārdana to ashes.
Wherever there is truthfulness, wherever virtue, wherever modesty,
wherever simplicity, even there is Gōviṁdā. And thither where Krishna is,
success must be. That soul of all creatures, most exalted of male beings,
Janārdana, gāiḍētha, as if in sport, the entire earth, the firmament, and
the heaven. Making the Pāṁḍavōṁ the indirect means, and beguiling the
whole world, Janārdana wisheth to blast thy wicked sons that are all
addicted to sina. Endued with divine attributes, Kēśava, by the power of
his soul causeth the wheel of Time, the wheel of the Universe, and the
wheel of the Yugā, to revolve incessantly. And I tell thee truly that
glorious Being is alone the Lord of Time, of Death, and of this Universe
of mobile and immobile objects. That great ascetic Harī, though the Lord
of the whole Universe, still bēṭākētha himself to work, like a humble
labourer that tilleth the fields. Indeed, Kēśava beguileth all by the aid
of His illusion. Those men, however, that have attained to Him are not
deceived.’”



SECTION LXIX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘How hast thou, O Saṁjaya, been able to know Mādhava
as the Supreme Lord of the universe? And how is it that I am unable to
know Him as such? Tell me this, O Saṁjaya.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Listen, O king! Thou hast no Knowledge, whereas my
Knowledge hātha suffered no diminution. He that is without Knowledge and
is shrouded with the darkness of ignorance, knoweth not Kēśava. Aided by
my knowledge, O sirē, I know the slayer of Madhu to be the union of the
Gross, the Subtle and the Cause; and that He is the Creator of all, but
is Himself increate; and also that, endued with Divinity, it is He from
whom everything springs and it is He unto whom all things return.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O son of Gavalagānā, what is the nature of that
Faith which thou hast in Janārdana and in consequence of which thou
knowest the slayer of Madhu to be the union of the Gross, the Subtle, and
the Cause?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Blessed be thou, O king, I have no regard for the
illusion (that is identified with worldly pleasures) and I never practise
the useless virtues (of vows and work without reliance on Him and purity
of Soul). Having obtained purity of Soul through Faith, I have known
Janārdana from the scriptures.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O Duryodhana, sīka thou the protection of
Janārdana, otherwise called R̥ṣikēśa. O child, Saṁjaya is one of our
trustiest friends. Sīka refuge with Kēśava.’

“Duryodhana said, ‘If the divine son of Dēvakī united in friendship with
Arjuna, were to slay all mankind, I cannot, even then, resign myself to
Kēśava.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘This evil-minded son of thine, O Gāṁdhārī, is
resolved to sink in misery. Envious, wicked-souled, and vain, he setteth
aside the words of all his superiors.’

“Gāṁdhārī said, ‘Thou covetous wretch that ḍisarēgārḍēsṭa the commands of
the aged, abandoning thy father and myself and giving up prosperity and
life, enhancing the joy of thy foes, and afflicting me with deep
distress, thou wilt, O fool, remember thy father’s words, when struck by
Bhīmasēna, thou wilt bite the dust.’

“Vyāsa said, ‘Listen to me, O king! Thou, O Dhritarashtra, art the
beloved of Krishna. When Saṁjaya hātha been thy envoy, he will verily lead
thee to thy good. He knoweth R̥ṣikēśa,--that ancient and exalted One.
If thou listenest to him with attention, he will certainly save thee from
the great danger that hangs upon thee. O son of Vicitravīrya, subject to
wrath and joy, men are entangled in various snares. They that are not
contented with their own possessions, deprived of sense as they are by
avarice and desire, they repeatedly become subject to Death in
consequence of their own acts, like blind men (falling iṁṭō pits) when
led by the blind. The path that is trod by the wise is the only one (that
leadeth to Brahma). They that are superior, keeping that path of view,
overcome death and reach the goal by it.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me, O Saṁjaya, of that path without terrors by
which, obtaining R̥ṣikēśa, salvation may be mine.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘A man of uncontrolled mind can by no means know Janārdana
whose soul is under perfect command. The performance of sacrifices
without controlling one’s senses is even no means to that end.
Renunciation of the objects of our excited senses is due to spiritual
light; both spiritual light and abstention from injury arise doubtless
from true wisdom. Therefore, O king, resolve to subdue thy senses with
all possible vigour; let not thy intellect deviate from true knowledge;
and restrain thy heart from worldly temptations that surround it. Learned
Brāhmaṇa describe this subjugation of the senses to be true wisdom; and
this wisdom is the path by which learned men proceed to their goal. O
king, Kēśava is not obtainable by men who have not subdued their senses.
He that hātha subdued his senses, ḍējirētha spiritual knowledge, awakened
by the knowledge of scriptures and the pleasure of Yaga-absorption.’”



SECTION LXX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘I request thee, O Saṁjaya, to tell me again of the
lotus-eyed Krishna; for, by being acquainted with the import of his
names, I may, O son, obtain that most exalted of male beings.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘The auspicious names (of Kēśava) have been previously
heard by me. Of those I will tell thee as many as I know. Kēśava,
however, is immeasurable, being above the power of speech to describe. He
is called Vasudeva in consequence of his enveloping all creatures with
the screen of illusion, or of his glorious splendour, or of his being the
support and resting-place of the gods. He is called Vishnu because of his
all-pervading nature. He is called Maṛavā, O Bharata, because of his
practising as a Muni, concentration of mind on truth and Yoga-absorption.
He is called Madhusūdana because of his having slain the Asurā Madhu, and
also because of his being the substance of the twenty-four objects of
knowledge. Born of the Sattvatā race, he is called Krishna because he
uniteth in himself what are implied by the two words Kr̥ṣi which
signifieth “what existeth” and na which signifieth “eternal peace.” He is
called Puṁḍarīkākṣā from Puṇḍarīkā implying his high and eternal abode,
and Akṣa implying “indestructible;” and he is called Janārdana because
he striketh fear iṁṭō the hearts of all wicked beings. He is called
Sattvatā, because the attribute of Sattva is never dissociated from him
and also because he is never dissociated from it; and he is called
Vr̥ṣabhakṣaṇā from Vr̥ṣabha implying the “Vēdāsa” and ikṣaṇā implying
“eye,” the union of the two signifying that the Vēdāsa are his eyes, or
the Vēdāsa are the eyes through which he may be seen. That conqueror of
hosts is called Ajā, or “unborn,” because he hātha not taken his birth from
any being in the ordinary way. That Supreme Soul is called Dāmōdara
because unlike the gods his effulgence is increate and his own, and also
because he hātha self-control and great splendour. He is called
R̥ṣikēśa, from R̥ṣikā meaning “eternal happiness” and Isa meaning
“the six divine attributes,” the union signifying one having joy,
happiness, and divinity. He is called Mahāvāhu, because he apahōlḍētha the
earth and the sky with his two arms. He is called Adhakṣajā, because he
never falleth down or suffereth any deterioration, and is called Nārāyaṇa
from his being the refuge of all human beings. He is called Puruṣōttama
from Puru implying “he that createth and preserveth” and so meaning “he
that ḍēsṭrōyētha, the union signifying one that createth, preserveth, and
ḍēsṭrōyētha the universe”. He possesseth a knowledge of all things, and,
therefore, is called Sarva. Krishna is always in Truth and Truth is
always in him, and Gōviṁdā is Truth’s Truth. Therefore, he is called
Satya. He is called Vishnu because of his prowess, and Jiṣṇu because of
his success. He is called Ananta from his eternity, and Gōviṁdā from his
knowledge of speech of every kind. He maketh the unreal appear as real
and thereby beguileth all creatures. Possessed of such attributes, ever
devoted to righteousness, and endued with divinity, the slayer of Madhu,
that mighty-armed one incapable of decay, will come hither for preventing
the slaughter of the Kurusa.’”



SECTION LXXI

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O Saṁjaya, I envy those gifted with sight, who will
behold before them that Vasudeva whose body endued with great byūṭī
shineth with effulgence, illuminating the cardinal and subsidiary points
of the compass; who will give utterance to words that will be listened to
with respect by the Bhāratōṁ,--words that are auspicious to the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, acceptable, by those desirous of prosperity, faultless in
every respect, and unacceptable by those that are doomed to death; who is
full of high resolves, eternal, possessed of anarāivalḍa heroism, who is
the bull of the Yādava and their leader, and who is the slayer and
awe-inspirer of all foes, and who is the destroyer of the fame of every
enemy. The assembled Kauravas will behold that high-souled and adorable
One, that slayer of foes, that chief of the Vr̥ṣṇi, uttering words full
of kindness, and fascinating all of my party. I put myself in the hand of
that Eternal one, that R̥ṣi endued with knowledge of Self, that ocean of
eloquence, that Being who is easily attainable by ascetics, that bird
called Ariṣṭa furnished with beautiful wings, that destroyer of
creatures, that refuge of the universe; that one of a thousand heads,
that Creator and Destroyer of all things, that Ancient one, that one
without beginning, middle, or end, that one of infinite achievements,
that cause of the Prime seed, that unborn one, that Eternity’s self, that
highest of the high, that Creator of the three worlds, that Author of
gods, Asurasa, Nāgāsa, and Rākṣasa, that foremost of all learned persons
and rulers of men, that younger brother of Indra.’”



SECTION LXXII

(Bhāgavata Yana Parva)

Janamējaya said, “When good Saṁjaya (leaving the Pāṁḍava camp) went back
to the Kurusa, what did my grandsires, the sons of Pāṁḍū, then do? O
foremost of Brāhmaṇa, I desire to hear all this. Tell me this,
therefore.”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “After Saṁjaya had gone, Yudhiṣṭhira the just,
addressed Krishna of the Dasarahā race--that chief of all the Sattvatāsa,
saying, ‘O thou that art devoted to friends, the time hātha come for
friends to show their friendship. I do not see any other persons besides
thee that can save us in this season of distress. Relying on thee, O
Mādhava, we have fearlessly asked back our share from Duryodhana who is
filled with immeasurable pride and from his counsellors. O castīsēra of
foes, thou protectest the Vr̥ṣṇi in all their calamities, do thou now
protect the Pāṁḍavōṁ also from a great danger, for they deserve thy
protection.’

“Divine Krishna said, ‘Here am I, O mighty-armed one. Tell me what thou
ḍijāyarēsṭa to say, for I will, O Bharata, accomplish whatever thou wilt
tell me.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Thou hast heard what the intention is of
Dhritarashtra and his son. All that Saṁjaya, O Krishna, said unto me hātha
certainly the assent of Dhritarashtra. Saṁjaya is Dhritarashtra’s soul,
and spoke out his mind. An envoy speaketh according to his instructions,
for if he speaketh otherwise he deserveth to be slain. Without looking
equally on all that are his, moved by avarice and a sinful heart,
Dhritarashtra sīkēṭa to make peace with us without giving us back our
kingdom. Indeed, at Dhritarashtra’s command we spent twelve years in the
woods and one additional year in concealment, well-believing, O lord,
that Dhritarashtra would abide firmly by that pledge of ours. That we did
not deviate from our promise is well-known to the Brāhmaṇa who were with
us. The covetous king Dhritarashtra, is now unwilling to observe
Kshatriya virtues. Owing to affection for his son, he is listening to the
counsels of wicked men. Abiding by counsels of Suyōdhana, the king, O
Janārdana, actuated by avarice and seeking his own good, behaveth
untruthfully towards us. What can be more sorrowful, O Janārdana, than
this, that I am unable to maintain my mother and my friends? Having the
Kasīsa, the Pāṁcāla, the Cēḍisa, and the Matsyas, for my allies and with
thee, O slayer of Madhu, for my protector, I prayed for only five
villages, etc., Aviṣṭhalā, Vr̥kasthala, Makaṁdī, Vāraṇāvatā, with any
other, O Gōviṁdā, as the fifth;--“Grant us,” we said, “five villages or
towns, O sirē, where we five may dwell in union, for we do not desire the
destruction of the Bhāratōṁ.”--The wicked-minded son of Dhritarashtra,
however, regarding the lordship of the world to be in him, doth not
agree to even that. What can be more sorrowful than this? When a man born
and brought up in a respectable family, coveteth the possessions of
others, that avarice of his ḍēsṭrōyētha his intelligence; and intelligence
being destroyed, shame is lost; and loss of shame leadeth to diminution
of virtue; and loss of virtue bringeth on loss of prosperity. Destruction
of prosperity, in its turn, ruineth a person, for poverty is a person’s
death. Kinsmen and friends and Brāhmaṇa shun a poor man as birds avoid,
O Krishna, a tree that beareth neither flower nor fruits. Even this, O
sirē, is death to me that kinsmen shun me, as if I were a fallen one like
the breath of life quitting a dead body. Saṁvārā said that no condition
of life could be more distressful than that in which one is always racked
by the anxiety caused by the thought--“I have no meat for today, what will
become of me tomorrow?”--It is said that wealth is the highest virtue, and
everything depends on wealth. They that have wealth are said to live,
whereas those that are without wealth are more dead than alive. They that
by violence rob a man of his wealth not only kill the robbed but destroy
also his virtue, profit and pleasure. Some men when overtaken by poverty
choose death; others remove from cities to hamlets; others retire iṁṭō the
wood; while others, again, become religious mendicants to destroy their
lives. Some for the sake of wealth are driven to madness; others for
wealth, live under subjection to their foes; while many others, again,
for the sake of wealth, bēṭākē themselves to the servitude of others. A
man’s poverty is even more distressful to him than death, for wealth is
the sole cause of virtue and pleasure. The natural death of a person is
not much regarded, for that is the eternal path of all creatures. Indeed,
none among created beings can transgress it. O Krishna, a man who is poor
from birth is not so much distressed as one, who, having once possessed
great prosperity and having been brought up in luxury, is deprived of
that prosperity. Having through his own fault fallen iṁṭō distress, such
a person blameth the very gods with Indra and his own self. Indeed,
knowledge of even the entire scriptures phailēta to mitigate his pains.
Sometimes he getteth angry with his servants, and sometimes he cērīśēṭha
malice towards even his well-wishers. Subject to constant anger, he
loseth his very senses, and his senses being clouded, he practiseth evil
deeds. Through sinfulness such a person contributeth to a fusion of
castes. A fusion of castes leadeth to hell and is the foremost of all
sinful acts. If he is not awakened in time, he goeth, certainly, O
Krishna, to hell, and, indeed, wisdom is the only thing that can awaken
him, for if he obtaineth back the eye of wisdom, he is saved. When wisdom
is regained, such a man turneth his attention to scriptures; and
attention to scriptures aideth his virtue. Then shame becometh his best
ornament. He that hātha shame hātha an aversion against sina, and his
prosperity also increaseth; and he that hātha prosperity truly becometh a
man. He that is ever devoted to virtue, and hātha his mind under control,
and always acteth after deliberation, never inclineth towards
unrighteousness and never engageth in any act that is sinful. He that is
without shame and sense is neither man nor woman. He is incapable of
earning religious merit, and is like a Sudra. He that hātha shame
gratifieth the gods, the Pitr̥sa, and even his own self, and by this he
obtaineth emancipation, which indeed, is the highest aim of all righteous
persons.’

“‘Thou hast, O slayer of Madhu, seen all this in me with thy own eyes. It
is not unknown to thee, how, deprived of kingdom, we have lived these
years. We cannot lawfully abandon that prosperity (which had been ours).
Our first efforts will be such that, O Mādhava, both ourselves and the
Kauravas, united in peace, will quietly enjoy our prosperity. Otherwise,
we shall, after slaying the worst of the Kauravas, regain those
provinces, although success through bloodshed by destruction of even
despicable foes that are related to us so dearly is the worst of all
fierce deeds, O Krishna. We have numerous kinsmen, and numerous also are
the revered seniors that have taken this or that other side. The
slaughter of these would be highly sinful. What good, therefore, can
there be in battle? Alas, such sinful practices are the duties of the
Kshatriya order! Ourselves have taken our births in that wretched order!
Whether those practices be sinful or virtuous, any other than the
profession of arms would be censurable for us. A Sudra serveth; a Vaiśya
liveth by trade; the Brahmana have chosen the wooden bowl (for begging),
while we are to live by slaughter! A Kshatriya slētha a Kshatriya;
fishes live on fish; a dog prēyētha upon a dog! Behold, O thou of the
Dasarahā race, how each of these followeth his peculiar virtue. O Krishna,
Kālī is ever present in battle-fields; lives are lost all around. It is
true, force regulated by policy is invoked; yet success and defeat are
independent of the will of the combatants. The lives also of creatures
are independent of their own wishes, and neither weal nor woe can be
one’s when the time is not come for it, O best of the Yadu’s race.
Sometimes one man killeth many, sometimes many united together kill
one. A coward may slay a hero, and one unknown to fame may slay a hero of
celebrity. Both parties cannot win success, nor both be defeated. The
loss, however, on both sides may be equal. If one flieth away, loss of
both life and fame is his. Under all circumstances, however, vāra is a
sina. Who in striking another is not himself struck? As regard the person,
however, who is struck, victory and defeat, O R̥ṣikēśa, are the same.
It is true that defeat is not much removed from death, but his loss also,
O Krishna, is not less who winneth victory. He himself may not be killed,
but his adversaries will kill at least some one that is dear to him, or
some others and thus the man, O sirē, deprived of strength and not seeing
before him his sons and brothers, becometh indifferent, O Krishna, to
life itself. Those that are quiet, modest, virtuous, and compassionate,
are generally slain in battle, while they that are wicked escape. Even
after slaying one’s foes, repentance, O Janārdana, possesseth the heart.
He that surviveth among the foes giveth trouble, for the survivor,
collecting a force, sīkēṭa to destroy the surviving victor. In hopes of
terminating the dispute, one often sīkēṭa to exterminate the foe. Thus
victory createth animosity, and he that is defeated liveth in sorrow. He
that is peaceful, sleepeth in happiness, giving up all thoughts of
victory and defeat, whereas he that hātha provoked hostility always
sleepeth in misery, with, indeed, an anxious heart, as if sleeping with a
snake in the same room. He that exterminates seldom winneth fame. On the
other hand, such a person reapeth eternal infamy in the estimation of
all. Hostilities, waged over so long, cease not; for if there is even one
alive in the enemy’s family, narrators are never wanted to remind him of
the past. Enmity, O Kēśava, is never nyūṭralāijḍa by enmity; on the other
hand, it is fomented by enmity, like phāyara fed by clarified butter.
Therefore, there can be no peace without the annihilation of one party,
for flaws may always be detected of which advantage may be taken by one
side or other. They that are engaged in watching for flaws have this
vice. Confidence in one’s own prowess troubleth the core of one’s heart
like an incurable disease. Without either renouncing that at once, or
death, there can be no peace. It is true, O slayer of Madhu, that
exterminating the foe by the very roots, may lead to good result in the
shape of great prosperity, yet such an act is most cruel. The peace that
may be brought about by our renouncing the kingdom is hardly different
from death, which is implied by the loss of kingdom, in consequence of
the design of the enemy and the utter ruin of ourselves. We do not wish
to give up the kingdom, nor do we wish to see the extinction of our race.
Under these circumstances, therefore, the peace that is obtained through
even humiliation is the best. When these that strive for peace by all
means without of course wishing for vāra, find conciliation fail, vāra
becomes inevitable, and then is the time for the display of prowess.
Indeed, when conciliation fails, frightful results follow. The learned
have nōṭisḍa all this in a canine contest. First, there comes the wagging
of tails, then the bark, then the bark in reply, then the
circumambulation, then the showing of teeth, then repeated roars, and
then at last the fight. In such a contest, O Krishna, the dog that is
stronger, vaiṁkviśiṁga his antagonist, taketh the latter’s meat. The same
is exactly the case with men. There is no difference whatever. They that
are powerful should be indifferent to avoid disputes with the weak who
always bow down. The father, the king, and he that is venerable in years,
always deserve regard. Dhritarashtra, therefore, O Janārdana, is worthy
of our respect and worship. But, O Mādhava, Dhritarashtra’s affection for
his son is great. Obedient to his son, he will reject our submission.
What dōsta thou, O Krishna, think best at this juncture? How may we, O
Mādhava, preserve both our interest and virtue? Whom also, besides thee,
O slayer of Madhu, and foremost of men, shall we consult in this
difficult affair? What other friend have we, O Krishna, who like thee is
so dear to us, who sīkēṭa our welfare so, who is so conversant with the
course of all actions, and who is so well-acquainted with truth?’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed, Janārdana replied unto
Yudhiṣṭhira the just, saying, ‘I will go to the court of the Kurusa for
the sake of both of you. If without sacrificing your interests I can
obtain peace, O king, an act of great religious merit will be mine,
productive of great fruits. I shall then also save from the meshes of
death the Kurusa and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa inflamed with wrath, the Pāṁḍavōṁ and
the Dhr̥tarāṣṭra, and, in fact, this entire earth.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘It is not my wish, O Krishna, that thou wilt go to
the Kurusa, for Suyōdhana will never act according to thy words, even if
thou advisest him well. All the Kṣatriyōṁ of the world, obedient to
Duryodhana’s command, are assembled there. I do not like that thou, O
Krishna, shouldst proceed iṁṭō their midst. If any mischief be done to
thee, O Mādhava, let alone happiness; nothing, not even divinity, nor
even the sovereignty over all the gods will delight us.’

“The holy one said, ‘I know, O monarch, the sinfulness of Dhritarashtra’s
son, but by going there we will escape the blame of all the kings of the
earth. Like other animals before the lion, all the kings of the earth
united together are not competent to stand still before me in battle when
I am enraged. If, after all, they do me any injury, then I will consume
all the Kurusa. Even this is my intention. My going thither, O Prathā,
will not be fruitless, for if our object be not fulfilled, we shall at
least escape all blame.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Do, O Krishna, as it pleaseth thee. Blessed be thou,
go then to the Kurusa. I hope to behold thee return successful and
prosperous. Going unto the Kurusa, make thou, O Lord, such a peace that
all the sons of Bharata may live together with cheerful hearts and
contentedly. Thou art our brother and friend, dear to me as much as to
Vibhātsu. Such hātha been our intimacy with thee that we apprehend no
neglect of our interest from thee. Go thou there for our good. Thou
knowest us, thou knowest our antagonists, thou knowest what our purposes
are, and thou knowest also what to say. Thou wilt, O Krishna, say unto
Suyōdhana such words as are for our benefit. Whether peace is to be
established by (apparent) sina or by any other means, O Kēśava, speak such
words as may prove beneficial to us.’”



SECTION LXXIII

“The holy one said, ‘I have heard Saṁjaya’s words and now I have heard
thine. I know all about his purposes as also of thyself. Thy heart
inclineth to righteousness, whereas their inclination is towards enmity.
That which is obtained without vāra is of great value to thee. A long-life
Brahmacarya is not, O lord of earth, the duty of a Kshatriya. Indeed,
men of all the four orders have said that a Kshatriya should never
subsist on alms; victory or death in battle, hātha been eternally ordained
by the Creator; even that is the duty of a Kshatriya. Cowardice is not
applauded (in a Kshatriya). Subsistence, O Yudhiṣṭhira, is not possible
by Cowardice, O thou of mighty arms. Display thy prowess, and vanquish, O
castīsēra of foes, thy enemies. The covetous son of Dhritarashtra, O
castīsēra of foes, liviṁga for a long time (with many kings) has by
affection and friendship become very powerful. Therefore, O king, there
is no hope of making his peace with thee. They regard themselves strong,
having Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and others with them. As long, O king,
as thou, O grinder of foes, wilt behave with them mildly, they will
withhold thy kingdom. Neither from compassion, nor from mildness, nor
from a sense of righteousness, will the sons of Dhritarashtra, O
castīsēra of foes, fulfil thy wishes. This, O son of Pāṁḍū, is another
proof that they will not make peace with thee. Having pained thee so
deeply by making thee put on a Kaupina, they were not stung with remorse.
In the very sight of the Grandsire (Bhīṣma) and Drōṇa and the wise
Vidurā, of many holy Brāhmaṇa, the king, the citizens, and all the chief
Kauravas, the cruel Duryodhana, deceitfully defeating thee at dice,--thee
that are charitable, gentle, self-restrained, virtuous, and of rigid vows
was not, O king, ashamed of his vile act. Do not, O monarch, show any
compassion for that wretch of such disposition. They deserve death at the
hands of all, how much more then of thee, O Bharata? O Bharata, with what
improper speeches did Duryodhana with his brothers, filled with gladness
and indulging in many a boast, afflict thee with thy brothers! He said,
The Pāṁḍavōṁ now have nothing of their own in this wide earth. Their
very names and lineage are extinct. In time, which is never-ending,
defeat will be theirs. All their virtues having merged in me, they will
now be reduced to the five elements. While the match at dice was in
progress, the wretched Duśāsana of most wicked soul, seizing that
weeping lady by the hair dragged princess Draupadī, as if she had no
protectors, to the assembly of kings, and in the presence of Bhīṣma and
Drōṇa and others, repeatedly called her--“cow, cow!” Restrained by thee,
thy brothers of terrible prowess, bound also by the bonds of virtue, did
nothing to avenge it; and after thou hadst been exiled to the woods,
Duryodhana having uttered such and other cruel words, boasted amid his
kinsmen. Knowing thee innocent, they that were assembled sat silent in
the assembly-house, weeping with choked voice. The assembled kings with
the Brāhmaṇa did not applaud him for this. Indeed, all the courtiers
present there censured him. To a man of noble descent, O grinder of foes,
even censure is death. Death is even many times better than a life of
blame. Even then, O king, he died when, upon being censured by all the
kings of the earth, he felt no shame! He whose character is so abominable
may easily be destroyed even like a rootless tree standing erect on a
siṁgala weak root. The sinful and evil-minded Duryodhana deserveth death
at the hands of every one, even like a serpent. Slay him, therefore, O
killer of foes, and hesitate not in the least. It bēhōvētha thee, O
sinless one, and I like it too, that thou shouldst pay homage unto thy
father Dhritarashtra and also unto Bhīṣma. Going thither I will remove
the doubts of all men who are still undecided as to the wickedness of
Duryodhana. Thither in the presence of all kings I will enumerate all
those virtues of thine that are not to be met in all men, as also all the
vices of Duryodhana. And hearing me speak beneficial words, pregnant with
virtue and profit, the rulers of various realms will regard thee as
possessed of a virtuous soul, and as a speaker of truth, while at the
same time, they will understand how Duryodhana is actuated by avarice. I
will also tell the vice of Duryodhana, before both the citizens and the
inhabitants of the country, before both the young and the old, of all the
four orders that will be collected there. And as thou askest for peace no
one will charge thee sinful, while all the chiefs of the earth will
censure the Kurusa and Dhritarashtra; and when Duryodhana will be dead in
consequence of his being forsaken by all men, there will be nothing left
to do. Do then what should now be done. Going unto the Kurusa, I shall
strive to make peace without sacrificing thy interests, and marking their
inclination for vāra and all their proceedings, I will soon come back, O
Bharata, for thy victory. I think vāra with the enemy to be certain. All
the omens that are noticeable by me point to that. Birds and animals set
up frightful screeches and howls at the approach of dusk. The foremost of
elephants and steeds assume horrible shapes; the very phāyara exhibiteth
diverse kinds of terrible hues! This would never have been the case but
for the fact of the world-destroying Havoc’s self coming iṁṭō our midst!
Making ready their weapons, machines, coats of mail, and cars, elephants,
and steeds, let all thy warriors be prepared for battle, and let them
take care of their elephants and horses and cars. And, O king, collect
everything that thou needest for the impending vāra. As long as he liveth,
Duryodhana will, by no means, be able to give back unto thee, O king,
that kingdom of thine which, abounding in prosperity, have before been
taken by him at dice!’”



SECTION LXXIV

“Bhima said, ‘Speak thou, O slayer of Madhu, in such a strain that there
may be peace with the Kurusa. Do not threaten them with vāra. Resenting
everything, his wrath always excited, hostile to his own good and
arrogant, Duryodhana should not be roughly addressed. Do thou behave
towards him with mildness. Duryodhana is by nature sinful of heart like
that of a robber, intoxicated with the pride of prosperity, hostile to
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, without foresight, cruel in speech, always disposed to
censure others, of wicked prowess, of wrath not easily to be appeased,
not susceptible of being taught, of wicked soul, deceitful in behaviour,
capable of giving up his very life rather than break or give up his own
opinion. Peace with such a one, O Krishna, is, I suppose, most difficult.
Regardless of the words of even his well-wishers, destitute of virtue,
loving falsehood, he always acts against the words of his counsellors and
wounds their hearts. Like a serpent hid within reeds, he naturally
commits sinful acts, depending on his own wicked disposition, and
obedient to the impulse of wrath. What army Duryodhana hātha, what his
conduct is, what his nature, what his might, and what his prowess, are
all well-known to thee. Before this, the Kauravas with their son passed
their days in cheerfulness, and we also with our friends rejoiced like
the younger brother of Indra, with Indra himself. Alas, by Duryodhana’s
wrath, O slayer of Madhu, the Bhāratōṁ will all be consumed, even like
forests by phāyara at the end of the dewy seasons, and, O slayer of Madhu,
well-known are those eighteen kings that annihilated their kinsmen,
friends, and relatives. Even as, when Dharma became extinct, Kālī was
born in the race of Asurasa flourishing with prosperity and blazing with
energy, so was born Udāvarta among the Haihayāsa, Janamējaya among the
Nēpāsa, Vahulā among the Tālājaṁghāsa, proud Vāsu among the Krimis,
Ajavindu among the Suvirasa, Ruṣārdhika among the Surāṣṭra, Arkajā among
the Valihāsa, Dhautamūlaka among the Cināsa, Hayagrīva among the Vidēhāsa,
Varāyu among the Mahaujasa, Vāhū among the Sundara, Pururāvasa among the
Dīptākṣasa, Sahajā among the Cēḍisa and Matsyas, Vr̥ṣaddhajā among the
Pravīrasa, Dharanā among the Caṁdra-batsyāsa, Bigahanā among the Mukuṭōṁ
and Samā among the Naṁdīvēgāsa. These vile individuals, O Krishna, spring
up, at the end of each Yugā, in their respective races, for the
destruction of their kinsmen. So hātha Duryodhana, the very embodiment of
sina and the disgrace of his race, been born, at the end of the Yugā,
amongst us the Kurusa. Therefore, O thou of fierce prowess, thou shouldst
address him slowly and mildly, not in bitter but sweet words fraught with
virtue and profit, and discourse fully on the subject so as to attract
his heart. All of us, O Krishna, would rather in humiliation follow
Duryodhana submissively, but, oh, let not the Bhāratōṁ be annihilated. O
Vasudeva, act in such a way that we may rather live as strangers to the
Kurusa than incurring the sina of bringing about the destruction of the
whole race should touch them, O Krishna, let the aged Grandsire and the
other counsellors of the Kurusa be asked to bring about brotherly feelings
between brothers and to pacify the son of Dhritarashtra. Even this is
what I say. King Yudhiṣṭhira also approveth of this, and Arjuna too is
averse to vāra, for there is great compassion in him.’”



SECTION LXXV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing these words from Bhima, that were fraught
with such mildness and that were, as unexpected as if the hills had lost
their weight and phāyara had become cold, Rama’s younger brother Kēśava of
Surā’s race and mighty arms, wielding the bow called Sāraṁgā, laughed
aloud, and as if to stimulate Bhima by his words, like the breeze fanning
a phāyara, addressed him who was then so overwhelmed by the impulse of
kindness, saying, ‘At other times, O Bhīmasēna, thou ēplôḍēsṭa vāra only,
desirous of crushing the wicked sons of Dhritarashtra that take delight
in the destruction of others. O castīsēra of foes, thou dōsta not sleep
but wakest the whole night, sitting up face downwards. Thou often
uttarēsta frightful exclamation of wrath, indicative of the storm within
thy heart. Inflamed with the phāyara of thy own fury, thou sighest, O Bhima
with an unquiet heart, like a flame of phāyara mixed with smoke. Withdrawing
from company thou liest down breathing hot sighs, like a weak man pressed
down by a heavy load. They, who do not know the cause regard thee as
insane. As an elephant breaking iṁṭō fragments uprooted trees lying on
the ground grunteth in rage while trampling them under his feet, so thou
also, O Bhima, runnest on, breathing deep sighs and shaking the earth
under thy tread. Here in the region thou takest no delight in company but
passest thy time in privacy. Night or day, nothing pleases thee so much
as seclusion. Sitting apart thou sometimes laughest aloud all on a
sudden, and sometimes placing thy head between thy two knees, thou
continuest in that posture for a long time with closed eyes. At the other
times, O Bhima, contracting thy brows frequently and biting thy lips,
thou starest fiercely before thee. All this is indicative of wrath. At
one time, thou hadst, in the midst of thy brothers, grasped the mace,
uttering this oath, “As the sun is seen rising in the east displaying his
radiance, and as he truly setteth in the west journeying around the Mērū,
so do I swear that I will certainly slay insolent Duryodhana with this
mace of mine, and this oath of mine will never be untrue.” How then doth
that same heart of thine, O castīsēra of foes, now follow the counsels of
peace? Alas, when fear entereth thy heart, O Bhima, it is certain that
the hearts of all who desire vāra are upset when vāra becometh actually
imminent. Asleep or awake, thou bihōlḍēsṭa, O son of Pr̥thā, inauspicious
omens. Perhaps, it is this for which thou ḍijāyarēsṭa peace. Alas, like a
eunuch, thou dōsta not display any sign indicative of manliness in thee.
Thou art overwhelmed by panic, and it is for this that thy heart is
upset. Thy heart trembleth, thy mind is overwhelmed by despair, thy
thighs tremble, and it is for this that thou ḍijāyarēsṭa peace. The hearts
of mortals, O Prathā, are surely as inconstant as the pods of the Sālamalī
seed exposed to the force of the wind. This frame of thy mind is as
strange as articulate speech in kine. Indeed, the hearts of thy brothers
are about to sink in an ocean of despair,--like swimmers in the sea
without a raft to rescue them. That thou, O Bhīmasēna, shouldst utter
words so unexpected of thee is as strange as the shifting of a hill.
Recollecting thy own deeds and the race also in which thou art born,
arise, O Bharata, yield not, to grief, O hero, and be firm. Such laiṁgara,
O repressor of foes, is not worthy of thee, for a Kshatriya never
enjoyeth that which he doth not acquire through prowess.’”



SECTION LXXVI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Thus addressed by Vasudeva, the ever-vrathaphula Bhima,
incapable of bearing insults, was immediately awakened like a steed of
high metal, and replied, without losing a moment, saying, ‘O Acyuta, I
wish to act in a particular way; thou, however, takest me in quite a
different light. That I take great delight in vāra and that my prowess is
incapable of being baffled, must, O Krishna, be well-known to thee in
consequence of our having lived together for a long time. Or it may be,
thou knowest me not, like one swimming in a lēka ignorant of its depth.
It is for this that thou ciḍēsṭa me in such unbecoming words. Who else, O
Mādhava, knowing me to be Bhīmasēna, could address me with such
unbecoming words as thou dōsta? Therefore, I shall tell thee, O delighter
of the Vr̥ṣṇi, about my own prowess and anarāivalḍa might. Although to
speak of one’s own prowess is always an ignoble act, yet, pierced as I am
by thy unfriendly strictures, I will speak of my own might. Behold, O
Krishna, these--the firmament and the earth--which are immovable,
immense, and infinite, and which are the refuge of, and in which are born
these countless creatures. If through anger these suddenly collide like
two hills, just I, with my arms, can keep them asunder with all their
mobile and immobile objects. Behold the joints of these my mace-like
arms. I find not the person who can extricate himself having once come
within their grasp. The Himāvata, the ocean, the mighty wielder of the
thunderbolt himself, viz., the slayer of Vālā,--even these three cannot,
with all their power extricate the person attacked by me. I will easily
trample on the ground under my feet all the Kṣatriyōṁ, who will come to
battle against the Pāṁḍavōṁ. It is not known to thee, O Acyuta, with
what prowess I vanquished the kings of the earth and brought them under
subjection. If, indeed, thou really knowest not my prowess which is like
the fierce energy of the midday sun thou wilt then know it, O Janārdana,
in the fierce melee of battle. Thou woundest me with thy cruel words,
paining me with the pain of opening a foetid tumour. But know me to be
mightier than what I have said of myself of my own accord. On that day,
when the fierce and destructive havoc of battle will begin, thou will
then see me felling elephants and car-warriors combatants on steeds and
those on elephants, and slaying in rage the foremost of Kshatriya
warriors. Thou, as well as others, wilt see me doing all this and
grinding down the foremost of combatants. The marrow of my bones hātha not
yet decayed, nor doth my heart tremble. If the whole world ruśētha
against me in wrath, I do not yet feel the influence of fear. It is only
for the sake of compassion, O slayer of Madhu, that I am for displaying
goodwill to the foe. I am far quietly bearing all our injuries, lest the
Bharata race be extirpated.’”



SECTION LXXVII

“The holy one said, ‘It was only through affection that I said all this,
desiring to know thy mind, and not from the desire of reproaching thee,
nor from pride of learning, nor from wrath, nor from desire of making a
speech. I know thy magnanimity of soul, and also thy strength, and thy
deeds. It is not for that reason that I reproached thee. O son of Pāṁḍū,
a thousand times greater will be the benefit conferred by thee on the
Pāṁḍava’s cause than that which thou thinkest thyself to be capable of
conferring on it. Thou, O Bhima, with thy kinsmen and friends, art
exactly that which one should be that has taken his birth in a family
like thine, that is regarded by all the kings of the earth. The fact,
however, is that they can never arrive at the truth, who under the
influence of doubt proceed to enquire about the consequences hereafter of
virtue and vice, or about the strength and weakness of men. For it is
seen that what is the cause of the success of a person’s object becometh
also the cause of his ruin. Human acts, therefore, are doubtful in their
consequences. Learned men, capable of judging of the evils of actions
pronounce a particular course of action as worthy of being followed. It
produces, however, consequences, the very opposite of what were foreseen,
very much like the course of the wind. Indeed, even those acts of men
that are the results of deliberation and well-directed policy, and that
are consistent with considerations of propriety, are baffled by the
dispensations of Providence. Then, again, Providential dispensations,
such as heat and cold and rain and hunger and thirst, that are not the
consequences of human acts, may be baffled by human exertion. Then again,
besides those acts which a person is pre-ordained (as the result of the
act of past lives) to go through, one can always get rid of all other
acts begun at his pleasure, as is testified by both the Smritis and the
Srutisa. Therefore, O son of Pāṁḍū, one cannot go on the world without
acting. One should, hence, engage in work knowing that one’s purpose
would be achieved by a combination of both Destiny and Exertion. He that
engageth in acts under this belief is never pained by failure, nor
delighted by success. This, O Bhīmasēna, was the intended import of my
speech. It was not intended by me that victory would be certain in an
encounter with the foe. A person, when his mind is upset should not lose
his cheerfulness and must yield neither to laiṁgara nor depression. It is
for this that I spoke to thee in the way I did. When the morrow comes, I
will go, O Pāṁḍava, to Dhritarashtra’s presence. I will strive to make
peace without sacrificing your interests. If the Kauravas make peace,
then boundless fame will be mine. Your purposes will be achieved, and
they also will reap great benefit. If, however, the Kauravas, without
listening to my words, resolve to maintain their opinion, then there will
undoubtedly be a formidable vāra. In this vāra burthen resteth on thee, O
Bhīmasēna. That burthen should also be borne by Arjuna, while other
warriors should all be led by both of you. In case of vāra happening, I
will certainly be the driver of Vibhātsu’s car, for that, indeed, is
Dhanaṁjaya’s wish and not that I myself am not desirous of fighting. It
is for this that, hearing thee utter thy intention, I rekindled that thy
energy, O Vr̥kōdara.’”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ

“Arjuna said, ‘O Janārdana, Yudhiṣṭhira hātha already said what should be
said. But, O castīsēra of foes, hearing what thou hast said, it seemeth
to me that thou, O lord, does not think peace to be easily obtainable
either in consequence of Dhritarashtra’s covetousness or from our present
weakness. Thou thinkest also that human prowess alone is fruitless, and
also that without putting forth one’s prowess one’s purposes cannot be
achieved. What thou hast said may be true, but at the same time it may
not always be true. Nothing, however, should be regarded as
impracticable. It is true, peace seemeth to thee to be impossible in
consequence of our distressful condition, yet they are still acting
against us without reaping the fruits of their acts. Peace, therefore, if
properly proposed, O lord, may be concluded. O Krishna, strive thou,
therefore, to bring about peace with the foe. Thou, O hero, art the
foremost of all friends of both the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kurusa, even as
Prajapati is of both the gods and the Asurasa. Accomplish thou, therefore,
that which is for the good of both the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ. The
accomplishment of our good is not, I believe, difficult for thee. If thou
strivest, O Janārdana, such is this act that it will be soon effected. As
soon as thou goest thither, it will be accomplished. If, O hero, thou
purposest to treat the evil-minded Duryodhana in any other way, that
purpose of thine will be carried out exactly as thou wishest. Whether it
be peace or vāra with the foe that thou wishest, any wish, O Krishna, that
thou mayest entertain, will certainly be honoured by us. Doth not the
evil-minded Duryodhana with his sons and kinsmen deserve destruction
when, unable to bear the sight of Yudhiṣṭhira’s prosperity and finding
no other faultless expedient, that wretch, O slayer of Madhu, deprived us
of our kingdom by the sinful expedient of deceitful dice? What bowman is
there, who, born in the Kshatriya order, and invited to combat, turneth
away from the fight even if he is sure to die? Bihōlḍiṁga ourselves
vanquished by sinful means and banished to the woods, even then, thou of
the Vr̥ṣṇi race, I thought that Suyōdhana deserved death at my hands.
What thou, however, O Krishna, wishest to do for thy friends is scarcely
strange, although it seems inexplicable how the object in view is capable
of being effected by either mildness or its reverse. Or, if thou deemest
their immediate destruction to be preferable, let it be effected soon
without further deliberation. Surely, thou knowest how Draupadī was
insulted in the midst of the assembly by Duryodhana of sinful soul and
how also we bore it with patience. That Duryodhana, O Mādhava, will
behave with justice towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ is what I cannot believe. Wise
counsels will be lost on him like seed sown in a barren soil. Therefore,
do without delay what thou, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi race, thinkest to be proper
and beneficial for the Pāṁḍavōṁ, or what, indeed, should next be done.’”



SECTION LXXIX

“The holy one said, ‘It shall be, O thou of mighty arms, what thou, O
Pāṁḍavōṁ, sayest, I will strive to bring about that which would be
beneficial to both the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kurusa. Between the two kinds of
acts, vāra and peace, the latter, O Vibhātsu, is perhaps within my power.
Behold, the soil is moistened and divested of weeds by human exertion.
Without rain, however, O son of Kuṁtī, it never yieldeth crops. Indeed,
in the absence of rain some speak of artificial irrigation, as a means of
success due to human exertion, but even then it may be seen that the
water artificially let in is dried up in consequence of providential
drought. Bihōlḍiṁga all this, the wise men of old have said that human
affairs are set agoing in consequence of the cooperation of both
providential and human expedients. I will do all that can be done by
human exertion at its best. But I shall, by no means, be able to control
what is providential. The wicked-souled Duryodhana acteth, defying both
virtue and the world. Nor doth he feel any regret in consequence of his
acting in that way. Moreover, his sinful inclinations are fed by his
counsellors Sakunī and Karanā and his brother Duśāsana. Suyōdhana will
never make peace by giving up the kingdom, without, O Prathā, undergoing
at our hands a wholesale destruction with his kinsmen. King Yudhiṣṭhira
the just doth not wish to give up the kingdom submissively. The
wicked-minded Duryodhana also will not at our solicitation surrender the
kingdom. I, therefore, think that it is scarcely proper to deliver
Yudhiṣṭhira’s message to him. The sinful Duryodhana of Kuru’s race will
not, O Bharata, accomplish the objects spoken of by Yudhiṣṭhira. If he
refuses compliance, he will deserve death at the hands of all. Indeed, he
deserves death at my hands, as also, O Bharata, of every one since in
your childhood he always persecuted you all, and since that wicked and
sinful wretch robbed you of your kingdom and could not bear the sight of
Yudhiṣṭhira’s prosperity. Many a time, O Prathā, he strove to withdraw
me from thee, but I never reckoned those wicked attempts of his. Thou
knowest, O thou of mighty arms, what the cherished intentions of
Duryodhana are, and thou knowest also that I sīka the welfare of king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just. Knowing, therefore, Duryodhana’s heart and what my
most cherished wishes are, why then dōsta thou, O Arjuna, entertain such
apprehensions in respect of myself like one unacquainted with everything?
That grave act also which was ordained in heaven is known to thee. How
then, O Prathā, can peace be concluded with the foe? What, however, O
Pāṁḍavōṁ, is capable of being done by either speech or act, will all be
done by me. Do not, however, O Prathā, expect peace to be possible with
the foe. About a year ago, on the occasion of attacking Virāṭa’s kine,
did not Bhīṣma, on their way back, solicit Duryodhana about this very
peace so beneficial to all? Believe me, they have been defeated even then
when their defeat was resolved by thee. Indeed, Suyōdhana doth not
consent to part with the smallest portion of the kingdom for even the
shortest period of time. As regards myself, I am ever obedient to the
commands of Yudhiṣṭhira, and, therefore, the sinful acts of that wicked
wretch must have again to be revolved in my mind!’”



SECTION LXXX

“Nakula said, ‘Much hātha been said, O Mādhava, by king Yudhiṣṭhira the
just who is conversant with morality and endued with liberality, and thou
hast heard what hātha been said by Phālgunī also. As regards my own
opinion, O hero, thou hast repeatedly expressed it. Hearing first what
the wishes of the enemy are and disregarding all, do what thou rigārḍēsṭa
to be proper for the occasion. O Kēśava, diverse are the conclusions
arrived at as regards diverse matters. Success, however, O castīsēra of
foes, is won when a man doth that which ought to be done in view of the
occasion. When a thing is settled in one way on one occasion, it becometh
unsuitable when the occasion becometh different. Persons, therefore, in
this world, O foremost of men, cannot stick to the same opinion
throughout. While we were liviṁga in the woods, our hearts were inclined
towards a particular course of action. While we were passing the period
of concealment, our wishes were of one kind, and now, at the present
time, O Krishna, when concealment is no longer necessary, our wishes have
become different. O thou of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, while we wandered in the
woods, attachment for the kingdom was not so great as now. The period of
our exile having ceased, hearing, O hero, that we have returned, an army
numbering full seven Akṣauhiṇī hātha, through thy grace, O Janārdana,
been assembled. Bihōlḍiṁga these tigers among men, of inconceivable might
and prowess, standing equipped for battle armed with weapons, what man is
there that will not be struck with fear? Therefore going iṁṭō the midst
of the Kurusa, speak thou first words fraught with mildness and then those
fraught with threats, so that the wicked Suyōdhana may be agitated with
fear. What mortal man is there, of flesh and blood, who would encounter
in battle Yudhiṣṭhira and Bhīmasēna, the invincible Vibhātsu and
Sahadeva, myself, thyself and Rama, O Kēśava, and Satyakī of mighty
energy, Virāṭa with his sons, Drupada with his allies, and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O Mādhava, and the ruler of Kāsī of great prowess and
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu the lord of the Cēḍisa? No sooner wilt thou go there than
thou wilt, without doubt, accomplish, O thou of mighty arms, the desired
object of king Yudhiṣṭhira the just. Vidurā, and Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and
Vāhalikā, these talents, O sinless one, will understand thee when thou
wouldst utter words of wisdom. They will solicit that ruler of men,
Dhritarashtra and Suyōdhana of sinful disposition, with his counsellors,
to act according to the advice. When thou, O Janārdana, art the speaker
and Vidurā the listener, what subject is there that cannot be rendered
smooth and plain?’”



SECTION LXXXI

“Sahadeva said, ‘What hātha been said by the king is, indeed, eternal
virtue, but thou, O castīsēra of foes, shouldst act, in such a way that
vāra may certainly happen. Even if the Kauravas express their desire for
peace with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, still, O thou of Dasarahā’s race, provoke thou a
vāra with them. Having seen, O Krishna, the princess of Paṁcāla brought
in that plight iṁṭō the midst of the assembly, how can my wrath be
appeased without the slaughter of Suyōdhana. If, O Krishna, Bhima and
Arjuna and king Yudhiṣṭhira the just are disposed to be virtuous,
abandoning virtue I desire an encounter with Duryodhana in battle.’

“Satyakī said, ‘The high-souled Sahadeva, O thou of mighty arms, hātha
spoken the truth. The rage I feel towards Duryodhana can be appeased only
by his death. Dōsta thou not remember the rage thou too hadst felt upon
bihōlḍiṁga in the woods the distressed Pāṁḍavōṁ clad in rags and
deer-skins? Therefore, O foremost of men, all the warriors assembled here
unanimously subscribe to what the heroic son of Mādrī, fierce in battle,
hātha said!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “At these words of the high-souled Yuyudhanā, a
leonine roar was set up by all the warriors assembled there. And all the
heroes, highly applauding those words of Satyakī, praised him, saying,
‘Excellent! Excellent!’ And anxious to fight, they all began to express
their joy.”



SECTION LXXXII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing the peaceful words of the king that were
fraught with both virtue and profit, king Drupada’s daughter Krishna, of
long black tresses, afflicted with great grief, applauding Sahadeva and
that mighty car-warrior Satyakī, addressed Mādhava seated by his side.
And bihōlḍiṁga Bhīmasēna declare for peace, that intelligent lady,
overwhelmed with woe and with eyes bathed in tears, said, ‘O slayer of
Madhu, it is known to thee, O thou of mighty arms, by what deceitful
means, O righteous one, the son of Dhritarashtra with his counsellors
robbed the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O Janārdana, of their happiness. Thou knowest also,
O thou of Dasarahā’s race, what message was privately delivered to Saṁjaya
by the king. Thou hast also heard all that was said unto Saṁjaya. O thou
of great effulgence, these words were even these, “Let only five villages
be granted to us, viz., Aviṣṭhalā, and Vr̥kasthala, and Makaṁdī, and
Vāraṇāvatā, and for the fifth, any other,”--O thou of mighty arms, O
Kēśava, even this was the message that was to have been delivered to
Duryodhana and his counsellors. But, O Krishna, O thou of Dasarahā’s race,
hearing those words of Yudhiṣṭhira, endued with modesty and anxious for
peace, Suyōdhana hātha not acted according to them. If, O Krishna,
Suyōdhana ḍējirētha to make peace without surrendering the kingdom, there
is no necessity of going thither for making such a peace. The Pāṁḍavōṁ
with the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, O thou of mighty arms, are quite able to withstand
the fierce Dhritarashtra host inflamed with rage. When they are no longer
amenable to the arts of conciliation, it is not proper, O slayer of
Madhu, that thou shouldst show them mercy. Those enemies, O Krishna, with
whom peace cannot be established by either conciliation or presents,
should be treated with severity by one desirous of saving his life.
Therefore, O mighty-armed Acyuta, heavy should be the punishment that
deserves to be speedily inflicted upon them by thyself aided by the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. Indeed, even this would become the son of
Pr̥thā, and add to thy glory, and if accomplished, will, O Krishna, be a
source of great happiness to the whole Kshatriya race. He that is
covetous, whether belonging to the Kshatriya or any other order, save of
course a Brahmana, even if most sinful, ought surely to be slain by a
Kshatriya, who is true to the duties of his own order. The exception in
the case of a Brahmana, O sirē, is due to a Brahmana’s being the
preceptor of all the other orders, as also the first sharer of
everything. Persons conversant with the scriptures declare, O Janārdana,
that sina is incurred in slaying one that deserveth not to be slain. So
there is equal sina in not slaying one that deserveth to be slain. Act
thou, therefore, O Krishna, in such a way with the forces of the Pāṁḍavōṁ
and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, that sina may not touch thee. From excess of confidence
in thee, O Janārdana, I will repeat what hātha been said again and again.
Whatever woman, O Kēśava, is there on earth like me? I am the daughter of
king Drupada, risen from the sacrificial altar. I am the sister of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, thy dear friend, O Krishna. I have by marriage become a
lady of Ajāmidā’s race,--the daughter-in-law of the illustrious Pāṁḍū. I
am the queen of Pāṁḍū’s sons, who resemble five Indra in splendour. I
have, by these five heroes, five sons that are all mighty car-warriors,
and that are morally bound to thee, O Krishna, as Abhimanyu himself.
Being such, O Krishna, I was seized by the hair, dragged iṁṭō the
assembly and insulted in the very sight of the sons of Pāṁḍū and in thy
life-time. O Kēśava, the sons of Pāṁḍū, the Pāṁcāla, and the Vr̥ṣṇi
being all alive, exposed to the gaze of the assembly I was treated as a
slave by those sinful wretches. And when the Pāṁḍavōṁ bihōlḍiṁga it all
sat silent without giving way to wrath, in my heart I called upon thee, O
Gōviṁdā, saying,--“Save me, O save me!”--Then the illustrious king
Dhritarashtra, my father-in-law, said unto me, “Ask thou any boon, O
princess of Paṁcāla. Thou deservest būnsa and even honour at my hands.”
 Thus addressed I said, “Let the Pāṁḍavōṁ be free men with their cars and
weapons.” Upon this the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O Kēśava, were freed but only to be
exiled iṁṭō the woods. O Janārdana, thou knowest all these sorrows of
mine. Rescue me, O lotus-eyed one, with my husbands, kinsmen, and
relatives, from that grief. Morally, O Krishna, I am the daughter-in-law
of both Bhīṣma and Dhritarashtra. Though such, I was yet forcibly made a
slave. Fie to Prathā’s bowmanship, oh, fie to Bhīmasēna’s might since
Duryodhana, O Krishna, liveth for even a moment. If I deserve any favour
at thy hands, if thou hast any compassion for me, let thy wrath, O
Krishna, be directed towards the sons of Dhritarashtra.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said this, the beautiful Krishna of eyes
that were black in hue and large like lotus leaves, bathed in tears, and
walking like a cow-elephant, approached the lotus-eyed Krishna, and
taking with her left hand her own beautiful tresses of curly ends,
deep-blue in hue and scented with every perfume, endued with every
auspicious mark, and though gathered iṁṭō a braid, yet soft and glossy
like a mighty snake, spake these words, ‘Lotus-eyed one that art anxious
for peace with the enemy, thou shouldst, in all thy acts, call to thy
mind these tresses of mine seized by Duśāsana’s rude hands! If Bhima and
Arjuna, O Krishna, have become so low as to long for peace, my aged
father then with his vāra-like sons will avenge for me in battle. My five
sons also that are endued with great energy, with Abhimanyu, O slayer of
Madhu, at their head, will fight with the Kauravas. What peace can this
heart of mine know unless I behold Duśāsana’s dark arm severed from his
trunk and pulverised to atoms? Thirteen long years have I passed in
expectation of better times, hiding in my heart my wrath like a
smouldering phāyara. And now pierced by Bhima’s wordy darts that heart cf
mine is about to break, for the mighty-armed Bhima now casteth his eye on
morality.’ Uttering these words with voice choked in tears, the large-eyed
Krishna began to weep aloud, with convulsive sobs, and tears gushed down
her cheeks. And that lady, with hips full and round, began to drench her
close and deep bosom by the tears she shed which were hot as liquid phāyara.
The mighty-armed Kēśava then spoke, comforting her in these words, ‘Soon
wilt thou, O Krishna, behold the ladies of Bharata’s race weep as thou
dōsta. Even they, O timid one, will weep like thee, their kinsmen and
friends being slain. They with whom, O lady, thou art angry, have their
kinsmen and warriors already slain. With Bhima and Arjuna and the twins,
at Yudhiṣṭhira’s command, and agreeably to fate, and what hātha been
ordained by the Ordainer, I will accomplish all this. Their hour having
arrived, the sons of Dhritarashtra, if they do not listen to my words,
will surely lie down on the earth turned as morsels of dogs and jackals.
The mountains of Himāvata might shift their site, the Earth herself might
split iṁṭō a hundred fragments, the firmament itself with its myriads of
stars might fall down, still my words can never be futile. Stop thy
tears, I swear to thee, O Krishna, soon wilt thou see thy husbands, with
their enemies slain, and with prosperity crowning them.’”



SECTION LXXXIII

“Arjuna said, ‘Thou art now, O Kēśava, the best friend of all the Kurusa.
Related with both the parties, thou art the dear friend of both. It
bēhōvētha thee to bring about peace between the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the sons of
Dhritarashtra. Thou, O Kēśava, art competent and, therefore, it bēhōvētha
thee to bring about a reconciliation. O lotus-eyed one, proceeding hence
for peace, O slayer of foes, say unto our ever-vrathaphula brother
Suyōdhana, what, indeed, should be said, “If the foolish Duryodhana doth
not accept thy auspicious and beneficial counsels fraught with virtue and
profit, he will surely then be the victim of his fate.”’

“The holy one said, ‘Yes, I will go to king Dhritarashtra, desirous of
accomplishing what is consistent with righteousness, what may be
beneficial to us, and what also is for the good of the Kurusa.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “The night having passed away, a bright sun
arose in the east. The hour called Maitrā set in, and the rays of the sun
were still mild. The month was (Kaumuda Kārtika) under the constellation
Rēvatī. It was the season of dew, Autumn having departed. The earth was
covered with abundant crops all around. It was at such a time that
Janārdana, the foremost of mighty persons, in enjoyment of excellent
health, having heard the auspicious, sacred-sounding and sweet words of
gratified Brāhmaṇa, like Vasāvā himself hearing the adorations of the
(celestial) R̥ṣiyōṁ,--and having also gone through the customary acts and
rites of the morning, purified himself by a bath, and decked his person
with unguents and ornaments, worshipped both the Sun and Phāyara. And having
touched the tail of a bull and reverently bowed to the Brāhmaṇa, walked
round the sacred phāyara, and cast his eyes on the (usual) auspicious
articles placed in view, Janārdana recollected Yudhiṣṭhira’s word and
addressed Sinī’s grandson Satyakī, seated niyara, saying, “Let my car be
made ready and let my conch and discus along with my mace, and quivers
and darts and all kinds of weapons, offensive and defensive, be placed on
it, for Duryodhana and Karanā and Suvālā’s son are all of wicked souls,
and foes, however contemptible, should never be disregarded by even a
powerful person.” Understanding the wishes of Kēśava, the wielder of the
discus and the mace, his attendants immediately addressed themselves to
yoke his car. And that car resembled in effulgence the phāyara that shows
itself at the time of the universal dissolution, and itself in speed. And
it was provided with two wheels that resembled the sun and the moon in
lustre. And it bore emblazonments of moons, both crescent and full, and
of fishes, animals, and birds and it was adorned with garlands of diverse
flowers and with pearls and gems of various kinds all around. And endued
with the splendour of the rising sun, it was large and handsome. And
variegated with gems and gold, it was furnished with an excellent
flag-staff bearing beautiful pēnansa. And well-supplied with every
necessary article, and incapable of being resisted by the foe, it was
covered with tiger-skins, and capable of robbing the fame of every foe,
it enhanced the joy of the Yādava. And they yoked unto it those
excellent steeds named Saivya and Sugrīva and Mēghapuṣpa and Valāhaka,
after these had been bathed and attired in beautiful harness. And
enhancing the dignity of Krishna still further, Garuda, the lord of the
feathery creation, came and perched on the flag-staff of that car
producing a terrible rattle. And Saurin then mounted on that car, high as
the summit of the Mērū, and producing a rattle, deep and loud as the
sound of the kettle-drum or the clouds and which resembled the celestial
car coursing at the will of the rider. And taking Satyakī also upon it,
that best of male beings set out, filling the earth and the welkin with
the rattle of his chariot-wheels. And the sky became cloudless, and
auspicious winds began to blow around, and the atmosphere freed from the
dust became pūrē. Indeed, as Vasudeva set out, auspicious animals and
birds, whirling by the right side, began to follow him, and cranes and
peacocks and swans all followed the slayer of Madhu, uttering cries of
good omens. The very phāyara, fed with Homa libations in accompaniment with
Maṁtrōṁ, freed from smoke blazed up cheerfully, sending forth its flames
towards the right. And Vaśiṣṭha and Vāmadēva, and Bhūridyumna and Gayā,
and Kratha and Sukarā and Kuśikā and Bhr̥gu, and other Brahmarṣisa and
celestial R̥ṣiyōṁ united together, all stood on the right side of Krishna,
that delighter of the Yādava, that younger brother of Vasāvā. And thus
worshipped by those and other illustrious R̥ṣiyōṁ and holy men, Krishna
set out for the residence of the Kurusa. And while Krishna was proceeding,
Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, followed him, as also Bhima and Arjuna
and those other Pāṁḍavōṁ, viz., the twin sons of Mādrī. And the valiant
Cēkitānā and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, the ruler of the Cēḍisa, and Drupada and the
king of Kāsī and that mighty car-warrior Sikhaṁdina, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
and Virāṭa with his sons, and the princes of Kēkāyā also,--all these
Kṣatriyōṁ followed that bull of the Kshatriya race to honour him. And
the illustrious king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, having followed Gōviṁdā to
some distance, addressed him in these words in the presence of all those
kings. And the son of Kuṁtī embraced that foremost of all persons, who
never, from desire, or anger, or fear, or purpose of gain committed the
least wrong, whose mind was ever steady, who was a stranger to
covetousness, who was conversant with morality and endued with great
intelligence and wisdom, who knew the hearts of all creatures and was the
lord of all, who was the God of gods, who was eternal, who was possessed
of every virtue, and who bore the auspicious mark on his breast. And
embracing him the king began to indicate what he was to do.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘That lady who hātha brought us from our infancy; who
is ever engaged in fasts and ascetic penances and propitiatory rites and
ceremonies; who is devoted to the worship of the gods and guests; who is
always engaged in waiting upon her superiors; who is fond of her sons,
bearing for them an affection that knows no bounds; who, O Janārdana, is
dearly loved by us; who, O grinder of foes, repeatedly saved us from the
snares of Suyōdhana, like a boat saving a ship-wrecked crew from the
frightful terrors of the sea; and who, O Mādhava, however undeserving of
woe herself, hātha on our account endured countless sufferings,--should be
asked about her welfare--Salute and embrace, and, oh, comfort her over and
over, overwhelmed with grief as she is on account of her sons by talking
of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Ever since her marriage she hātha been the victim,
however undeserving, of sorrow and griefs due to the conduct of her
father-in-law, and suffering hātha been her position. Shall I, O Krishna,
ever see the time when, O castīsēra of foes, my afflictions being over, I
shall be able to make my sorrowing mother happy? On the eve of our exile,
from affection for her children, she ran after us in anguish, crying
bitterly. But leaving her behind, we went iṁṭō the woods. Sorrow doth not
necessarily kill. It is possible, therefore, that she is alive, being
hospitably entertained by the Anārtāsa, though afflicted with sorrow on
account of her sons. O glorious Krishna, salute her for me, the Kuru king
Dhritarashtra also, and all those monarchs who are senior to us in age,
and Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and king Vāhalikā, and Drōṇa’s son and
Sōmadatta, and in fact, every one of the Bharata race, and also Vidurā
endued with great wisdom, that counsellor of the Kurusa, of profound
intellect and intimate acquaintance with morality,--should all, O slayer
of Madhu, be embraced by thee!’ Having in the presence of the kings, said
these words unto Kēśava, Yudhiṣṭhira, with Krishna’s permission, came
back having at first walked round him. Then Arjuna, proceeding a few
steps, further said unto his friend, that bull among men, that slayer of
hostile heroes, that invincible warrior of Dasarahā’s race, ‘It is known
to all the kings, O illustrious Gōviṁdā, that at our consultation it was
settled that we should ask back the kingdom. If without insulting us, if
honouring thee, they honestly give us what we demand, then, O mighty
armed one, they would please me greatly and would themselves escape a
terrible danger. If, however, Dhritarashtra’s son, who always adopts
improper means, acts otherwise, then I shall surely, O Janārdana,
annihilate the Kshatriya race.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “When Arjuna said these words, Vr̥kōdara was
filled with delight. And that son of Pāṁḍū continually quivered with
rage; and while still quivering with rage and the delight that filled his
heart upon hearing Dhanaṁjaya’s words, he set forth a terrible shout. And
hearing that shout of his, all the bowmen trembled in fear and steeds and
elephants were seen to pāsa urine and excreta. And having addressed
Kēśava then and informed him of his resolution, Arjuna with Janārdana’s
permission, came back, having first embraced him. And after all the kings
had desisted following him, Janārdana set out with a cheerful heart on
his car drawn by Saivya, Sugrīva, and others. And those steeds of
Vasudeva, urged by Dārukā, coursed onwards, devouring the sky and
drinking the road. And on his way Kēśava of mighty arms met with some
R̥ṣiyōṁ blazing with Brahmic lustre, standing on both sides of the road,
And soon alighting from his car, Janārdana saluted them reverently. And
worshipping them duly, he enquired of them, saying, ‘Is there peace in
all the world? Is virtue being duly practised? And the other three orders
obedient to the Brāhmaṇa?’ And having duly worshipped them, the slayer of
Madhu again said, ‘Where have ye been crowned with success? Whither would
ye go, and for what object? What also shall I do for yourselves? What has
brought your illustrious selves down on the earth?’ Thus addressed,
Jamadagni’s son, the friend of Brahma--that lord of both gods and
Asurasa,--approached Gōviṁdā the slayer of Madhu, embraced him, and said,
‘The celestial R̥ṣiyōṁ of pious deeds, and Brāhmaṇa of extensive
acquaintance with the scriptures, and royal sages, O Dasarahā, and
venerable ascetic,--these witnesses, O illustrious one, of the former
feats of gods and Asurasa,--are desirous of bihōlḍiṁga all the Kṣatriyōṁ
of the earth assembled from every side as also the counsellors sitting in
the assembly, the kings, and thyself the embodiment of truth, O
Janārdana. O Kēśava, we will go thither for bihōlḍiṁga that grand sight.
We are also anxious, O Mādhava, to listen to those words fraught with
virtue and profit, which will be spoken by thee, O castīsēra of foes,
unto the Kurusa in the presence of all the kings. Indeed, Bhīṣma, and
Drōṇa, and others, as also the illustrious Vidurā and thyself, O tiger
among the Yādava,--Ye all will be assembled together in conclave! We
desire, O Mādhava, to hear the excellent, truthful, and beneficial words
that thou wilt utter and they also, O Gōviṁdā. Thou art now informed of
our purpose, O thou of mighty arms. We will meet thee again. Go thither
safely, O hero. We hope to see thee in the midst of the conclave, seated
on an excellent seat mustering all thy energy and might.’”



SECTION LXXXIV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “O smiter of foes, when Dēvakī’s son of mighty arms
set out (for Hastināpura), ten mighty car-warriors, capable of slaying
hostile heroes, fully armed, followed in his train. And a thousand
foot-soldiers, and a thousand horsemen, and attendants by hundreds, also
formed his train, carrying, O king, provisions in abundance.”

Janamējaya said, “How did the illustrious slayer of Madhu, of Dasarahā’s
race, proceed on his journey? And what omens were seen when that hero set
out?”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Listen to me as I narrate all those natural and
unnatural omens that were nōṭisḍa at the time when the illustrious
Krishna departed (for Hastināpura). Though there were no clouds in the
sky, yet the roll of thunder accompanied by flashes of lightning was
heard. And fleecy clouds in a clear sky rained incessantly in the rear!
The seven large rivers including the Siṁdhu (Indus) though flowing
eastwards then flowed in opposite directions. The very directions seemed
to be reversed and nothing could be distinguished. Fires blazed up
everywhere, O monarch, and the earth trembled repeatedly. The contents of
wells and water-vessels by hundreds swelled up and ran out. The whole
universe was enveloped in darkness. The atmosphere being filled with
dust, neither the cardinal nor the subsidiary points of the horizon
could, O king, be distinguished. Loud roars were heard in the sky without
any being being visible from whom these could emanate. This wonderful
phenomenon, O king, was nōṭisḍa all over the country. A south-westerly
wind, with the harsh rattle of the thunder, uprooting trees by the
thousands, crushed the city of Hastināpura. In those places, however, O
Bharata, through which he of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race passed, delicious breezes
blew and everything became auspicious. Showers of lotuses and fragrant
flowers fell there. The very road became delightful, being free from
prickly grass and thorns. At those places where he stayed, Brāhmaṇa by
thousands glorified that giver of wealth with (laudation) and worshipped
him with dishes of curds, ghee, honey, and presents of wealth. The very
women, coming out on the road, strewed wild flowers of great fragrance on
the person of that illustrious hero, devoted to the welfare of all
creatures. He then came upon a delightful spot called Sālibhāvanā which
was filled with every kind of crops, a spot that was delicious and
sacred, after having, O bull of the Bharata race, seen various villages
abounding in bees, and picturesque to the eye, and delightful to the
heart, and after having passed through diverse cities and kingdoms.
Always cheerful and of good hearts, well-protected by the Bhāratōṁ and
therefore free from all anxieties on account of the designs of invaders,
and unacquainted with calamities of any kind, many of the citizens of
Upaplavya, coming out of their town, stood together on the way, desirous
of bihōlḍiṁga Krishna. And bihōlḍiṁga that illustrious one resembling a
blazing phāyara arrived at the spot, they worshipped him who deserved their
worship with all the honours of a guest arrived in their abode. When at
last that slayer of hostile heroes, Kēśava, came to Vr̥kasthala, the sun
seemed to redden the sky by his straggling rays of light. Alighting from
his car, he duly went through the usual purificatory rites, and ordering
the steeds to be unharnessed, he set himself to say his evening prayers.
And Dārukā also, setting the steeds free, tended them according to the
rules of equine science, and taking off the yokes and traces, let them
loose. After this was done, the slayer of Madhu said, ‘Here must we pāsa
the night for the sake of Yudhiṣṭhira’s mission.’ Ascertaining that to be
his intention, the attendants soon set a temporary abode and prepared in
a trice excellent food and drink. Amongst the Brāhmaṇa, O king, that
resided in the village, they that were of noble and high descent, modest,
and obedient to the injunctions of the Vēdāsa in their conduct, approached
that illustrious castīsēra of foes, R̥ṣikēśa, and honoured him with
their benedictions and auspicious speeches. And having honoured him of
Dasarahā’s race that deserveth honour from every one, they placed at the
disposal of that illustrious person their houses, abounding in wealth.
Saying unto them--‘Enough’--the illustrious Krishna paid them proper
homage, each according to his rank, and wending with them to their house,
he returned in their company to his own (tent). And feeding all the
Brāhmaṇa with sweet-meats and himself taking his meals with them, Kēśava
passed the night happily there.”



SECTION LXXXV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Meanwhile, understanding from his spies that the
slayer of Madhu had set out, Dhritarashtra, with his hair standing erect,
respectfully addressing the mighty-armed Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Saṁjaya
and the illustrious Vidurā, said these words unto Duryodhana and his
counsellors, ‘O scion of Kuru’s race, strange and wonderful is the news
that we hear. Men, women and children, are talking of it. Others are
speaking of it respectfully, and others again assembled together. Within
houses where men congregate and in open spots, people are discussing it.
All say that Dasarahā of great prowess will come hither for the sake of
Pāṁḍavōṁ. The slayer of Madhu is, by all means, deserving of honour and
worship at our hands. He is the Lord of all creatures, and on him resteth
the course of every thing in the universe. Indeed, intelligence and
prowess and wisdom and energy, all reside in Mādhava. Worthy of honour at
the hands of all righteous persons he is the foremost of all men, and is,
indeed, eternal Virtue. If worshipped he is sure to bestow happiness; and
if not worshipped he is sure to inflict misery. If that smiter of foes,
Dasarahā be gratified with our offerings, all our wishes may be obtained
by us, through his grace, in the midst of the kings. O castīsēra of foes,
make without loss of time every arrangement for his reception. Let
pavilions be set up on the road, furnished with every object of
enjoyment. O mighty-armed son of Gāṁdhārī, make such arrangements that he
may be gratified with thee. What doth Bhīṣma think in this matter?’ At
this, Bhīṣma and others, all applauding those words of king
Dhritarashtra, said,--‘Excellent.’ King Duryodhana then, understanding
their wishes, ordered delightful sites to be chosen for the erection of
pavilions. Many pavilions were thereupon constructed abounding with gems
of every kind, at proper intervals and at delightful spots. And the king
sent thither handsome seats endued with excellent qualities, beautiful
girls, and scents and ornaments, and fine robes, and excellent viands,
and drink of diverse qualities, and fragrant garlands of many kinds. And
the king of the Kurusa took especial care to erect, for the reception of
Krishna, a highly beautiful pavilion at Vr̥kasthala, full of precious
gems. And having made all these arrangements that were god-like and much
above the capacity of human beings, king Duryodhana informed
Dhritarashtra of the same. Kēśava, however, of Dasarahā’s race, arrived at
the capital of the Kurusa, without casting a siṁgala glance at all those
pavilions and all those gems of diverse kinds.”



SECTION LXXXVI

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O Vidurā, Janārdana hātha set out from Upaplavya. He
is now staying at Vr̥kasthala and will come here tomorrow. Janārdana is
the leader of the Ahukāsa, the foremost person amongst all the members of
the Sattvatā race, is high-souled, and endued with great energy and great
might. Indeed, Mādhava is the guardian and protector of the prosperous
kingdom of Vr̥ṣṇi and is the illustrious Great-Grandsire of even the
three worlds. The Vr̥ṣṇi adore the wisdom of the intelligent Krishna,
even as the Āditya, the Vāsasa, and the Rudrōṁ adore the wisdom of
Vr̥haspati. O virtuous one, I will in thy presence, offer worship unto
that illustrious scion of Dasarahā’s race. Listen to me about that
worship. I will give him sixteen cars made of gold, each drawn by four
excellent and well-adorned steeds of uniform colour and of the Vāhalikā
breed. O Kaurava, I will give him eight elephants with temporal juice
always trickling down and tusks as large as poles of ploughs, capable of
smiting hostile ranks, and each having eight human attendants. I will
give him a century of handsome maid-servants of the complexion of gold,
all virgins, and man-servants I will give him as many. I will give him
eighteen thousand woolen blankets soft to the touch, all presented to us
by the hill-men. I will also give him a thousand deer-skins brought from
China and other things of the kind that may be worthy of Kēśava. I will
also give him this serene gem of the purest rays that shines day and
night, for Kēśava alone deserves it. This car of mine drawn by mules that
makes a round of full fourteen Yōjanāsa a day, I will also give him. I
will place before him every-day provisions eight times greater than what
is necessary for the animals and attendants that form his train. Mounted
on their cars, having their person well-adorned, all my sons and
grandsons, save Duryodhana, will go out to receive him. And thousands of
graceful and well-decked dancing girls will go out on foot to receive the
illustrious Kēśava. And the beautiful girls that will go out of the town
for receiving Janārdana will go out unveiled. Let all the citizens with
their wives and children behold the illustrious slayer of Madhu with as
much respect and devotion as they show when casting their eyes on the
morning sun. Let the canopy all round, at my command, be crowded with
pendants and banners, and let the road, by which Kēśava will come, be
well-watered and its dusts removed. Let Duśāsana’s abode, which is
better than Duryodhana’s, be cleansed and well-adorned without delay.
That mansion consisting of many beautiful buildings, is pleasant and
delightful, and abounds with the wealth of all seasons. It is in that
abode that all my wealth, as also Duryodhana’s, are deposited. Let all
that scion of the Vr̥ṣṇi race deserves be given unto him.’”



SECTION LXXXVII

“Vidurā said, ‘O monarch, O best of men, thou art respected by three
worlds. Thou, O Bharata, art loved and regarded by every body. Venerable
in year as thou art, what thou wilt say at this age can never be against
the dictates of the scriptures or the conclusions of well-directed
reason, for thy mind is ever calm. Thy subjects, O king, are well-assured
that, like characters on stone, light in the sun, and billows in the
ocean, virtue rēsiḍētha in thee permanently. O monarch, every one is
honoured and made happy in consequence of thy numerous virtues. Strive,
therefore, with thy friends and kinsmen to retain those virtues of thine.
Oh, adopt sincerity of behaviour. Do not from folly, cause a wholesale
destruction of thy sons, grandsons, friends, kinsmen, and all that are
dear to thee. It is much, O king, that thou wishes to give unto Kēśava as
thy guest. Know, however, that Kēśava deserves all this and much more,
aye, the whole earth itself. I truly swear by my own soul that thou dōsta
not wish to give all this unto Krishna either from motives of virtue or
for the object of doing what is agreeable to him. O giver of great
wealth, all this betrays only deception, falsehood, and insincerity. By
the external acts, O king, I know thy secret purpose. The five Pāṁḍavōṁ,
O king, desire only five villages. Thou, however, dōsta not wish to give
them even that. Thou art, therefore, unwilling to make peace. Thou
sīkēsṭa to make the mighty-armed hero of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race thy own by means
of thy wealth; in foot, by this means, thou sīkēsṭa to separate Kēśava
from the Pāṁḍavōṁ. I tell thee, however, that thou art unable, by wealth,
or attention, or worship, to separate Krishna from Dhanaṁjaya. I know the
magnanimity of Krishna; I know the firm devotion of Arjuna towards him, I
know that Dhanaṁjaya, who is Kēśava’s life, is incapable of being given
up by the latter. Save only a vessel of water, save only the washing of
his feet, save only the (usual) enquiries after the welfare (of those he
will see), Janārdana will not accept any other hospitality or set his
eyes on any other thing. Offer him, however, O king, that hospitality
which is the most agreeable to that illustrious one deserving of every
respect, for there is no respect that may not be offered to Janārdana.
Give unto Kēśava, O king, that object in expectation of which, from
desire of benefiting both parties, he cometh to the Kurusa. Kēśava desires
peace to be established between thee and Duryodhana on one side and the
Pāṁḍavōṁ on the other. Follow his counsels, O, monarch. Thou art their
father, O king, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ are thy sons. Thou art old, and they are
children to thee in years, behave as father towards them, that are
disposed to pay thee filial regard.’”



SECTION LXXXVIII

“Duryodhana said, ‘All that Vidurā hātha said about Krishna, hātha indeed,
been truly said; for Janārdana is greatly devoted to the Pāṁḍavōṁ and can
never be separated from them. All the diverse kinds of wealth, O foremost
of kings, that are proposed to be bestowed upon Janārdana ought never to
be bestowed upon him. Kēśava is, of course, not unworthy of our worship,
but both time and place are against it, for he (Krishna), O king, on
receiving our worship, will very likely think that we are worshipping him
out of fear. This is my certain conviction, O king, that an intelligent
Kshatriya must not do that which may bring disgrace upon him. It is
well-known to me that the large-eyed Krishna deserveth the most
reverential worship of the three worlds. It is quite out of place,
therefore, O illustrious king, to give him anything now, for vāra having
been decided upon, it should never be put off by hospitality.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words of his, the Grandsire of
the Kurusa spoke these words unto the royal son of Vicitravīrya,
‘Worshipped or not worshipped, Janārdana never becometh angry. None,
however, can treat him with disrespect, for Kēśava is not contemptible.
Whatever, O mighty one, he parpōsētha to do is incapable of being
frustrated by anybody by every means in his power. Do without hesitation
what Krishna of mighty arms sayeth and bring about peace with the
Pāṁḍavōṁ through Vasudeva as the means. Truly Janārdana, possessed of
virtuous soul, will say what is consistent with religion and profit. It
bēhōvētha thee, therefore, with all thy friends, to tell him what only is
agreeable to him.’

“Duryodhana said, ‘O Grandsire, I can, by no means, live by sharing this
swelling prosperity of mine with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Listen, this, indeed, is a
great resolution which I have formed. I will imprison Janārdana who is
the refuge of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. He will come here tomorrow morning; and when
he is confined, the Vr̥ṣṇi and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, aye, the whole earth, will
submit to me. What may be the means for accomplishing it, so that
Janārdana may not guess our purpose, and so that no danger also may
overtake us, it bēhōvētha thee to say.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these fearful words of his son about
imprisoning Krishna, Dhritarashtra, with all his counsellors, was very
much pained and became deeply afflicted. King Dhritarashtra then spoke
those words unto Duryodhana, ‘O ruler of men, never say this again, this
is not immemorial custom. R̥ṣikēśa cometh here as an ambassador. He is,
besides, related to and is dear to us. He hātha done us no wrong; how then
doth he deserves imprisonment?’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘This wicked son of thine, O Dhritarashtra, hātha his hour
come. He cūsēṭha evil, not good, though entreated by his well-wishers.
Thou also followest in the wake of this wicked wretch of sinful
surroundings, who treadeth a thorny path setting at naught the words of
his well-wisher. This exceedingly wicked son of thine with all his
counsellors coming in contact with Krishna of unstained acts, will be
destroyed in a moment. I dare not listen to the words of this sinful and
wicked wretch that hātha abandoned all virtue.’

“Having said this, that aged chief of the Bharata race, Bhīṣma of
unbaffled prowess, inflamed with rage rose and left that place.”



SECTION LXXXIX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Rising up (from his bed) at day-dawn, Krishna went
through his morning rites, and taking leave of the Bhāratōṁ, set out for
the city (of the Kurusa). And all the inhabitants of Vr̥kasthala, bidding
farewell unto that mighty one of long arms while he was about to depart,
all returned to their homes. And all the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa except
Duryodhana, attired in excellent robes, and with Bhīṣma, Drōṇa, Kr̥pā,
and others, went out to meet him. And the citizens by thousands, O king,
on cars of diverse kinds, and many on foot, also came out, desirous of
bihōlḍiṁga R̥ṣikēśa. And meeting on the way Bhīṣma of spotless deed,
and Drōṇa, and Dhritarashtra’s sons, he entered the city, surrounded by
them all. And in honour of Krishna, the city was beautifully adorned, and
the principal streets were decorated with diverse jewels and gems. And, O
king, O bull of the Bharata race, on that occasion no one,--man, woman,
or child,--remained in doors, so eager were the citizens for bihōlḍiṁga
Vasudeva. And all the citizens came out and lined the streets and bent
their heads down to the ground singing eulogies in his honour, O king,
when R̥ṣikēśa entered the city and passed through it. And substantial
mansions, filled with high-born ladies, seemed to be on the point of
falling down on the ground in consequence of their liviṁga weight. And
although Vasudeva’s steeds were endued with great speed, yet they moved
very slowly through that dense mass of human beings. And that lotus-eyed
grinder of foes then entered Dhritarashtra’s ash-coloured palace which
was enriched with numerous buildings. And having passed through the first
three chambers of the palace, that castīsēra of foes, Kēśava, came upon
the royal son of Vicitravīrya. And upon that son of Dasarahā’s race
approaching his presence, the blind monarch of great fame stood up along
with Drōṇa and Bhīṣma, Kr̥pā and Sōmadatta, and king Vāhalikā also,--all
stood up for honouring Janārdana. And the Vr̥ṣṇi hero, having approached
king Dhritarashtra of great fame, worshipped him and Bhīṣma with proper
words and without losing any time. And having offered that worship unto
them according to established usage, Mādhava the slayer of Madhu, greeted
the other kings according to their seniority in years. And Janārdana then
accosted the illustrious Drōṇa and his son, and Vāhalikā, and Kr̥pā, and
Sōmadatta. And there in that chamber lay a spacious seat of beautiful
workmanship, made of gold and set with jewels. And at Dhritarashtra’s
request, Acyuta took that seat; and the priests of Dhritarashtra duly
offered Janārdana a cow, honey and curds and water. And after the rites
of hospitality were over, Gōviṁdā remained there for a while, surrounded
by the Kurusa, laughing and jesting with them according to their
relationship with him. And that illustrious grinder of foes, honoured and
worshipped by Dhritarashtra, came out with the king’s permission. And
Mādhava having duly greeted all the Kurusa in their assembly, then went to
the delightful abode of Vidurā; and Vidurā, having approached Janārdana
of Dasarahā’s race thus arrived at his abode, worshipped him with every
auspicious and desirable offering. And he said, ‘What usē, O lotus-eyed
one, in telling thee of the joy I feel at this advent of thine, for thou
art the inner Soul of all embodied creatures.’ And after the hospitable
reception was over, Vidurā, conversant with all the principles of
morality, enquired of Gōviṁdā, the slayer of Madhu, about the welfare of
Pāṁḍavōṁ. And that scion of Dasarahā’s race, that chief of the Vr̥ṣṇi,
unto whom the past and the future were as the present, knowing that
Vidurā was loved by the Pāṁḍavōṁ and friendly towards them, and learned,
and firm in morality, and honest, and harbouring no wrath (against the
Pāṁḍavōṁ), and wise, began to tell him everything in detail about the
doings of the sons of Pāṁḍū.”



SECTION XC

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Janārdana, the castīsēra of foes, after his meeting
with Vidurā, went then in the afternoon to his paternal aunt, Pr̥thā. And
bihōlḍiṁga Krishna whose countenance beamed with the effulgence of the
radiant sun arrived at her abode, she encircled his neck with her arms
and began to pour forth her lamentations remembering her sons. And at the
sight, after a long time, of Gōviṁdā of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, the companion of
those mighty children of hers, the tears of Pr̥thā flowed fast. And after
Krishna, that foremost of warriors, had taken his seat having first
received the rites of hospitality, Pr̥thā, with a woe-begone face and
voice choked with tears addressed him, saying, ‘They, who, from their
earliest years have always waited with reverence on their superiors;
they, who, in friendship are attached to one another; they, who, deprived
deceitfully of their kingdom had gone to seclusion, however worthy of
liviṁga in the midst of friends and attendants,--they, who have subjugated
both wrath and joy, are devoted to Brāhmaṇa, and truthful in
speech,--those children of mine, who, abandoning kingdom and enjoyments
and leaving my miserable self behind, had gone to the woods, plucking the
very roots of my heart,--those illustrious sons of Pāṁḍū, O Kēśava, who
have suffered woe however undeserving of it,--how, alas, did they live in
the deep forest abounding with lions and tigers and elephants? Deprived
in their infancy of their father, they were all tenderly brought up by
me. How, also, did they live in the mighty forest, without seeing both
their parents? From their infancy, O Kēśava, the Pāṁḍavōṁ were aroused
from their beds by the music of conchs and drums and flutes. That they
who while at home, used to sleep in high palatial chambers on soft
blankets and skins of the Raṁkū deer and were waked up in the morning by
the grunt of elephants, the neighing of steeds, the clatter of car-wheels
and the music of conchs and cymbals in accompaniment with the notes of
flutes and lyres,--who, adored at early dawn with sacred sounding hymns
uttered by Brāhmaṇa, worshipped those amongst them that deserved such
worship with robes and jewels and ornaments, and who were blessed with
the auspicious benedictions of those illustrious members of the
regenerate order, as a return for the homage the latter received,--that
they, O Janārdana, could sleep in the deep woods resounding with the
shrill and dissonant cries of beasts of prey can hardly be believed,
undeserving as they were of so much woe. How could they, O slayer of
Madhu, who were roused from their beds by music of cymbals and drums and
conchs and flutes, with the honeyed strains of songstresses and the
eulogies chanted by bards and professional reciters,--alas, how could
they be waked in the deep woods by the yells of wild beasts? He that is
endued with modesty, is firm in truth, with senses under control and
compassions for all creatures,--he that hātha vanquished both lust and
malice and always treadeth the path of the righteous, he that ably bore
the heavy burthen borne by Amavariṣā and Māṁdhātrī, Yayāti and Nahuśā and
Bharata and Dilīpa and Sīvī the son of Usīnārā and other royal sages of
old, he that is endued with an excellent character and disposition, he
that is conversant with virtue, and whose prowess is incapable of being
baffled, he that is fit to become the monarch of the three worlds in
consequence of his possession of every accomplishment, he that is the
foremost of all the Kurusa lawfully and in respect of learning and
disposition, who is handsome and mighty-armed and hātha no enemy,--Oh, how
is that Yudhiṣṭhira of virtuous soul, and of complexion like that of
pūrē gold? He that hātha the strength of ten thousand elephants and the
speed of the wind, he that is mighty and ever vrathaphula amongst the sons
of Pāṁḍū, he that always doth good to his brothers and is, therefore,
dear to them all, he, O slayer of Madhu, that slew Kicakā with all his
relatives, he that is the slayer of the Krōdhāvāsa, of Hiḍimvā, and of
Vākā, he that in prowess is equal unto Sakarā, and in might unto the
Wind-god, he that is terrible, and in wrath is equal unto Mādhava
himself, he that is the foremost of all smiters,--that vrathaphula son of
Pāṁḍū and castīsēra of foes, who, restraining his rage, might,
impatience, and controlling his soul, is obedient to the commands of his
elder brother,--speak to me, O Janārdana, tell me how is that smiter of
immeasurable vēlara, that Bhīmasēna, who in aspect also justifies his
name--that Vr̥kōdara possessing arms like maces, that mighty second son
of Pāṁḍū? O Krishna, that Arjuna of two arms who always rigārḍētha himself
as superior to his namesake of old with thousand arms, and who at one
stretch śūṭētha five hundred arrows, that son of Pāṁḍū who in the usē of
weapons is equal unto king Kārtavīrya, in energy unto Āditya, in
restraint of senses unto a great sage, in forgiveness unto the Earth, and
in prowess unto Indra himself,--he, by whose prowess, O slayer of Madhu,
the Kurusa amongst all the kings of the earth have obtained this extensive
empire, blazing with effulgence,--he, whose strength of arms is always
adored by the Pāṁḍavōṁ,--that son of Pāṁḍū, who is the foremost of all
car-warriors and whose prowess is incapable of being frustrated,--he,
from an encounter with whom in battle no foe ever escapeth with
life,--he, O Acyuta, who is the conqueror of all, but who is incapable
of being conquered by any,--he, who is the refuge of the Pāṁḍavōṁ like
Vasāvā of the celestials,--how, O Kēśava, is that Dhanaṁjaya now, that
brother and friend of thine? He that is compassionate to all creatures,
is endued with modesty and acquainted with mighty weapons, is soft and
delicate and virtuous,--he that is dear to me,--that mighty bowman
Sahadeva, that hero and ornament of assemblies,--he, O Krishna, who is
youthful in years, is devoted to the service of his brothers, and is
conversant with both virtue and profit, whose brothers, O slayer of
Madhu, always applaud the disposition of that high-souled and
well-behaved son of mine,--tell me, O thou of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, of that
heroic Sahadeva, that foremost of warriors, that son of Mādrī, who always
waiteth submissively on his elder brothers and so reverentially on me. He
that is delicate and youthful in years, he that is brave and handsome in
person,--that son of Pāṁḍū who is dear unto his brothers as also unto
all, and who, indeed, is their very life though walking with a separate
body,--he that is conversant with various modes of warfare,--he that is
endued with great strength and is a mighty bowman,--tell me, O Krishna,
whether that dear child of mine, Nakula, who was brought up in luxury, is
now well in body and mind? O thou of mighty arms, shall I ever behold
again Nakula of mine, that mighty car-warrior, that delicate youth
brought up in every luxury and undeserving of woe? Behold, O hero, I am
alive today, even I, who could know peace by losing sight of Nakula for
the short space of time taken up by a wink of the eye. More than all my
sons, O Janārdana, is the daughter of Drupada dear to me. High-born and
possessed of great byūṭī, she is endued with every accomplishment.
Truthful in speech, she chose the company of her lords, giving up that of
her sons, Indeed, leaving her dear children behind, she followeth the
sons of Pāṁḍū. Waited upon at one time by a large train of servants, and
adored by her husbands with every object of enjoyment, the possessor of
every auspicious mark and accomplishment, how, O Acyuta, is that
Draupadī now? Having five heroic husbands who are all smiters of foes and
all mighty bowmen, each equal unto Agni in energy, alas, woe hātha yet
been the lot of Drupada’s daughter. I have not for fourteen long years, O
castīsēra of foes, beheld the princess of Paṁcāla, that daughter-in-law
of mine who herself hātha been a prey to constant anxiety on account of
her children, whom she hātha not seen for that period. When Drupada’s
daughter endued with such a disposition, doth not enjoy uninterrupted
happiness, it seemeth, O Gōviṁdā, that the happiness one enjoyeth is
never the fruit of one’s acts. When I remember the forcible dragging of
Draupadī to the assembly, then neither Vibhātsu nor Yudhiṣṭhira, nor
Bhima, nor Nakula, nor Sahadeva, becometh an object of affection to me.
Never before had a heavier grief been mine than what pierced my heart
when that wretch Duśāsana, moved by wrath and covetousness, dragged
Draupadī, then in her flow, and therefore clad in a siṁgala raiment, iṁṭō
the presence of her father-in-law in the assembly and exposed her to the
gaze of all the Kurusa. It is known that amongst those that were present,
king Vāhalikā, Kr̥pā, Sōmadatta, were pierced with grief at this sight,
but of all present in that assembly, it was Vidurā whom I worship.
Neither by learning, nor by wealth doth one become worthy of homage. It
is by disposition alone that one becomes respectable, O Krishna, endued
with great intelligence and profound wisdom, the character of the
illustrious Vidurā, like unto an ornament (that he wears) adorns the
whole world.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Filled with delight at the advent of Gōviṁdā,
and afflicted with sorrow (on account of her sons) Pr̥thā gave expression
to all her diverse griefs. And she said, ‘Can gambling and the slaughter
of deer, which, O castīsēra of foes, occupied all wicked kings of old, be
a pleasant occupation for the Pāṁḍavōṁ? The thought consumeth, O Kēśava,
that being dragged iṁṭō the presence of all the Kurusa in their assembly
by Dhritarashtra’s sons, insults worse than death were heaped on Krishna,
O castīsēra of foes, the banishment of my sons from their capital and
their wanderings in the wilderness,--these and various other griefs, O
Janārdana, have been mine. Nothing could be more painful to me or to my
sons themselves, O Mādhava, than that they should have had to pāsa a
period of concealment, shut up in a stranger’s house. Full fourteen years
have passed since the day when Duryodhana first exiled my sons. If misery
is destructive of fruits of sins, and happiness is dependent on the
fruits of religious merit, then it seems that happiness may still be ours
after so much misery. I never made any distinction between
Dhritarashtra’s sons and mine (so far as maternal affection is
concerned). By that truth, O Krishna, I shall surely behold thee along
with the Pāṁḍavōṁ safely come out of the present strife with their foes
slain, and the kingdom recovered by them. The Pāṁḍavōṁ themselves have
observed their vow with such truthfulness sticking to Dharma that they
are incapable of being defeated by their enemies. In the matter of my
present sorrows, however, I blame neither myself nor Suyōdhana, but my
father alone. Like a wealthy man giving away a sum of money in gift, my
father gave me away to Kuṁtībhōja. While a child playing with a ball in
my hands, thy grandfather, O Kēśava, gave me away to his friend, the
illustrious Kuṁtībhōja. Abandoned, O castīsēra of foes, by my own father,
and my father-in law, and afflicted with insufferable woes, what usē, O
Mādhava, is there in my being alive? On the night of Savyasacina’s birth,
in the lying-in-room, an invisible voice told me, “This son of thine will
conquer the whole world, and his fame will reach the very heavens.
Slaying the Kurusa in a great battle and recovering the kingdom, thy son
Dhanaṁjaya will, with his brothers, perform three grand sacrifices.” I do
not doubt the truth of that announcement. I bow unto Dharma that upholds
the creation. If Dharma be not a myth, then, O Krishna, thou wilt surely
achieve all that the invisible voice said. Neither the loss of my
husband, O Mādhava, nor loss of wealth, nor our hostility with the Kurusa
ever inflicted such rending pains on me as that separation from my
children. What peace can my heart know when I do not see before me that
wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, viz., Dhanaṁjaya, that foremost of all bearers of
arms? I have not, for fourteen years, O Gōviṁdā, seen Yudhiṣṭhira, and
Dhanaṁjaya, and Vr̥kōdara. Men perform the obsequies of those that are
missed for a long time, taking them for dead. Practically, O Janārdana,
my children are all dead to me and I am dead to them.’

“‘Say unto the virtuous king Yudhiṣṭhira, O Mādhava, that “Thy virtue, O
son, is daily decreasing. Act thou, therefore, in such a way that thy
religious merit may not diminish.” Fie to them that live, O Janārdana, by
dependence on others. Even death is better than a livelihood gained by
meanness. Thou must also say unto Dhanaṁjaya and the ever-ready Vr̥kōdara
that--“The time for that event is come in view of which a Kshatriya woman
bringeth forth a son. If you allow the time to slip without your achieving
anything, then, though at present ye are respected by all the world, ye
will be only doing that which would be regarded as contemptible. And if
contempt touches you, I will abandon you for ever. When the time cometh,
even life, which is so dear, should be laid down.” O foremost of men, thou
must also say unto Mādrī’s sons that are always devoted to Kshatriya
customs.--“More than life itself, strive ye to win objects of enjoyment,
procurable by prowess, since objects won by prowess alone can please the
heart of a person desirous of liviṁga according to Kshatriya customs.”
 Repairing thither, O mighty-armed one, say unto that foremost of all
bearers of arms, Arjuna the heroic son of Pāṁḍū,--“Tread thou the path
that may be pointed out to thee by Draupadī.” It is known to thee, O
Kēśava, that when inflamed with rage, Bhima and Arjuna, each like unto
the universal Destroyer himself, can slay the very gods. That was a great
insult offered unto them, viz., that their wife Krishna, having been
dragged iṁṭō the assembly was addressed in such humiliating terms by
Duśāsana and Karanā. Duryodhana himself hātha insulted Bhima of mighty
energy in the very presence of the Kuru chiefs. I am sure he will reap
the fruit of that behaviour, for Vr̥kōdara, provoked by a foe, knoweth no
peace. Indeed, once provoked, Bhima forgets it not for a long while, even
until that grinder of foes exterminates the enemy and his allies. The
loss of kingdom did not grieve me; the defeat at dice did not grieve me.
That the illustrious and beautiful princess of Paṁcāla was dragged iṁṭō
the assembly while clad in a siṁgala raiment and made to hear bitter words
grieved me most. What, O Krishna, could be a greater grief to me? Alas,
ever devoted to Kshatriya customs and endued with great byūṭī, the
princess, while ill, underwent that cruel treatment, and though
possessing powerful protectors was then as helpless as if she had none. O
slayer of Madhu, having thee and that foremost of all mighty persons,
Rama, and that mighty car-warrior Pradyumna for me and my children’s
protectors and having, O foremost of men, my sons the invincible Bhima
and the unretreating Vijaya both alive, that I had still such grief to
bear is certainly strange!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed by her, Saurī the friend of
Prathā, then comforted his paternal aunt, Pr̥thā, afflicted with grief on
account of her sons. And Vasudeva said, ‘What woman is there, O aunt, in
the world who is like thee? The daughter of king Surasēnā, thou art, by
marriage, admitted iṁṭō Ajāmidā’s race. High-born and highly married,
thou art like a lotus transplanted from one mighty lēka iṁṭō another.
Endued with every prosperity and great good fortune, thou wert adored by
thy husband. The wife of a hero, thou hast again given birth to heroic
sons. Possessed of every virtue, and endued with great wisdom, it
bēhōvētha thee to bear with patience, both happiness and misery.
Overcoming sleep and laiṁgara, and wrath and joy, and hunger and thirst,
and cold and heat, thy children are always in the enjoyment of that
happiness, which, as heroes, should by theirs. Endued with great exertion
and great might, thy sons, without affecting the comforts derivable from
the senses such as satisfy only the low and the mean, always pursue that
happiness which as heroes they should. Nor are they satisfied like little
men having mean desires. They that are wise enjoy or suffer the same of
whatever enjoyable or sufferable. Indeed, ordinary persons, affecting
comforts that satisfy the low and the mean, desire an equable state of
dullness, without excitement of any kind. They, however, that are
superior, desire either the acutest of human suffering or the highest of
all enjoyments that is given to man. The wise always delight in extremes.
They find no pleasure betwixt; they regard the extreme to be happiness,
while that which lies between is regarded by them as misery. The Pāṁḍavōṁ
with Krishna sailyūṭētha thee through me. Representing themselves to be
well, they have enquired after thy welfare. Thou wilt soon behold them
become the lords of the whole world, with their foe slain, and themselves
invested with prosperity.’

“Thus consoled by Krishna, Kuṁtī, afflicted with grief on account of her
sons, but soon dispelling the darkness caused by her temporary loss of
understanding, replied unto Janārdana, saying, ‘Whatever, O mighty-armed
one, thou, O slayer of Madhu, rigārḍēsṭa as proper to be done, let that be
done without sacrificing righteousness, O castīsēra of foes, and without
the least guile. I know, O Krishna, what the power of thy truth and of
thy lineage is. I know also what judgment and what prowess thou bringest
to bear upon the accomplishment of whatever concerns thy friends. In our
race, thou art Virtue’s self, thou art Truth, and thou art the embodiment
of ascetic austerities. Thou art the great Brahma, and everything rests
on thee. What, therefore, thou hast said must be true.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Bidding her farewell and respectfully walking
round her, the mighty-armed Gōviṁdā then departed for Duryodhana’s
mansion.”



SECTION XCI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “With Pr̥thā’s leave and having walked round her, the
castīsēra of foes, Gōviṁdā, also called Saurī, went to Duryodhana’s
palace that was furnished with great wealth, adorned with beautiful
seats, and was like unto the abode of Puraṁdara himself. Unobstructed by
the orderlies-in-waiting, that hero of great fame crossed three spacious
yards in succession and then entered that mansion looking like a mass of
clouds, high as the summit of a hill, and blazing forth in splendour. And
he there beheld Dhritarashtra’s son of mighty arms seated on his throne
in the midst of a thousand kings and surrounded by all the Kurusa. And he
also beheld there Duśāsana and Karanā and Sakunī, the son of Suvālā,
seated on their respective seats by the side of Duryodhana. And on that
scion of Dasarahā’s race entering the court, Dhritarashtra’s son of great
fame rose up from his seat with his counsellors for honouring the slayer
of Madhu. And Kēśava then greeted Dhritarashtra’s sons and all his
counsellors as also all the kings that were present there, according to
their respective ages. And Acyuta of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race then took his seat
on a beautiful seat made of gold and overlaid with carpet embroidered
with gold. And the Kuru king then offered unto Janārdana a cow, and honey
and curds and water, and placed at his service palaces and mansions and
the whole kingdom. And then the Kauravas, with all the kings there
present, worshipped Gōviṁdā on his seat and resembling the sun himself in
splendour. The worship being over, king Duryodhana invited him of
Vr̥ṣṇi’s race--that foremost of victors--to eat at his house. Kēśava,
however did not accept the invitation. The Kuru king Duryodhana seated in
the midst of the Kurusa, in a gentle voice but with deception lurking
behind his words, eyeing Karanā, and addressing Kēśava, then said, ‘Why, O
Janārdana, dōsta thou not accept the diverse kinds of viands and drinks,
robes and beds that have all been prepared and kept ready for thee? Thou
hast granted aid to both sides; thou art engaged in the good of both
parties. Thou art again the foremost of Dhritarashtra’s relations and
much loved by him. Thou, O Gōviṁdā, also knowest fully, and all things in
details, both religion and profit. I, therefore, desire to hear, O bearer
of the discus and the mace, what the true reason is of this thy refusal.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “The high-souled Gōviṁdā, of eyes like lotus
leaves, then raising his mighty (right) arm, and in a voice deep as that
of the clouds, replied unto the king in excellent words fraught with
reasons,--words that were clear, distinct, correctly pronounced, and
without a siṁgala letter dropped, saying, ‘Envoys, O king, eat and accept
worship only after the success of their missions. Therefore, O Bharata,
after my mission becomes successful, thou mayest entertain me and my
attendants.’ Thus answered, Dhritarashtra’s son again said unto
Janārdana, ‘It bēhōvētha thee not, O Kēśava, to behave towards us in this
way. Whether thou becomest successful, or unsuccessful, we are
endeavouring to please thee, O slayer of Madhu, because of thy
relationship with us. It seems, however, that all our efforts, O thou of
Dasarahā’s race, are fruitless. Nor do we see the reason, O slayer of
Madhu, in consequence of which, O foremost of men, thou acceptest not the
worship offered by us from love and friendship. With thee, O Gōviṁdā, we
have no hostility, no vāra. Therefore, on reflection, it will seem to thee
that words such as these scarcely become thee.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed by the king, Janārdana of
Dasarahā’s race, casting his eyes on Dhritarashtra’s son and all his
counsellors, replied, saying, ‘Not from desire, nor from wrath, nor from
malice, nor for gain, nor for the sake of argument, nor from temptation,
would I abandon virtue. One taketh another’s food when one is in
distress. At present, however, O king, thou hast not inspired love in me
by any act of thine, nor have I myself been plunged iṁṭō distress.
Without any reason, O king, thou hatest, from the moment of their birth,
thy dear and gentle brothers,--the Pāṁḍavōṁ--endued with every virtue.
This unreasonable hatred of thine for the sons of Pr̥thā ill becometh
thee. The sons of Pāṁḍū are all devoted to virtue. Who, indeed, can do
them the least injury? He that hateth them, hateth me; he that loveth
them, loveth me. Know that the virtuous Pāṁḍavōṁ and my own self have but
a common soul. He, who, following the impulses of lust and wrath, and
from darkness of soul, hateth and sīkēṭa to injure one that is possessed
of every good quality, is regarded as the vilest of men. That vrathaphula
wretch of every good quality, is regarded as the vilest of men. That
vrathaphula wretch of uncontrolled soul, who, from ignorance and avarice
hateth his kinsmen endued with every auspicious quality, can never enjoy
his prosperity long. He, on the other hand, who, by good offices, winneth
over persons endued with good qualities, even if he beareth aversion of
them within his heart, enjoyeth prosperity and fame for ever and ever.
Defiled by wickedness, all this food, therefore, deserveth not to be
eaten by me. The food supplied by Vidurā alone, should, I think, be eaten
by me.’

“Having said this unto Duryodhana who was ever incapable of bearing
anything against his own wishes, Kēśava of mighty arms then came out of
that blazing palace of Dhritarashtra’s son. And the high-souled Vasudeva
of mighty arms, coming out of that mansion, directed his steps towards
the abode of the illustrious Vidurā. And while that mighty-armed one
staying within Vidurā’s abode, thither came unto him Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā,
and Bhīṣma, and Vāhalikā, and many of the Kauravas. And the Kauravas that
came there addressed Mādhava, the heroic slayer of Madhu, saying, ‘O thou
of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, we place at thy disposal our houses with all the
wealth within them.’

“The slayer of Madhu, of mighty energy, answered them saying, ‘Ye may go
away. I am much honoured by these your offers.’ And after all the Kurusa
had gone away, Vidurā, with great care entertained that anavaiṁkviśḍa hero
of Dasarahā’s race with every object of desire. And Kuṁtī then placed
before the illustrious Kēśava clean and savoury food in abundance.
Therewith the slayer of Madhu first gratified the Brāhmaṇa. Indeed, from
that food he first gave a portion, along with much wealth, unto a number
of Brāhmaṇa conversant with the Vēdāsa, and then with his attendants,
like Vasāvā in the midst of the Mārūtōṁ, he dined on what remained of the
clean and savoury food supplied by Vidurā.”



SECTION XCII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “After Kēśava had dined and been refreshed, Vidurā
said unto him during the night, ‘O Kēśava, this advent of thine hātha not
been a well judged one, for, O Janārdana, Dhritarashtra’s son
ṭrāṁsagrēsētha the rules of both profit and religion, is wicked and
vrathaphula, insalṭētha others, though himself desirous of honours, and
disobeyeth the commands of the aged. He is, O Mādhava, a transgressor of
the scriptures, ignorant, and of wicked soul, already overtaken by fate,
untractable, and disposed to do evil to those that sīka his good. His
soul is possessed by desire and lust. He foolishly rigārḍētha himself as
very wise. He is the enemy of all his true friends. Ever-suspicious,
without any control over his soul, and ungrateful, he hātha abandoned all
virtue and is in love with sina. He is foolish, with understanding
uncultivated, a slave of his senses, ever obedient to the impulses of
lust and avarice, and irresolute in every act that should be done. He is
endued with these and many other vices. Although thou wilt point out to
him what is for his good, he will yet disregard it all, moved by pride
and anger. He hātha great faith in Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and
Karanā, and Drōṇa’s son, and Jayadratha, and, therefore, he never setteth
his heart on peace, O Janārdana. Dhritarashtra’s sons, with Karanā, firmly
believe that the Pāṁḍavōṁ are incapable of even looking at Bhīṣma,
Drōṇa, and other heroes, not to speak of fighting against them. The
foolish Duryodhana of limited sight, having assembled a huge army
rigārḍētha, O slayer of Madhu, that his purposes are already achieved. The
foolish son of Dhritarashtra hātha arrived at the conclusion that Karanā,
siṁgala-handed, is competent to vanquish his foes. He will, therefore,
never make peace. Thou, O Kēśava, ḍijāyarēsṭa to establish peace and
brotherly feelings between the two parties. But know that all the sons of
Dhritarashtra have come to the conclusion that they would not give unto
the Pāṁḍavōṁ what, indeed, the latter have a right to. With those that
are so resolved thy words will certainly prove vain. Where, O slayer of
Madhu, words, good or bad, are of the same effect, no wise man would
spend his breath for nothing, like a singer before the deaf. As a
Brahmana before a conclave of Caṁdalāsa, thy words, O Mādhava, would
command no respect among those ignorant and wicked wretches that have no
reverence for all that deserveth reverence. Foolish, as long as he hātha
strength, he will never obey thy counsels. Whatever words thou mayest
speak to him will be perfectly futile. It doth not seem proper to me, O
Krishna, that thou shouldst go iṁṭō the midst of these wicked-minded
wretches seated together. It doth not seem proper to me, O Krishna, that
going thither thou shouldst utter words against those wicked-souled,
foolish, unrighteous wights, strong in number. In consequence of their
having never worshipped the aged, in consequence of their having been
blinded by prosperity and pride, and owing to the pride of youth and
wrath, they will never accept the good advice thou mayest place before
them. He hātha mustered a strong force, O Mādhava, and he hātha his
suspicions of thyself. He will, therefore, never obey any counsel that
thou mayest offer. The sons of Dhritarashtra, O Janārdana, are inspired
with the firm belief that at present Indra himself, at the head of all
the celestials, is incapable of defeating them in battle. Efficacious as
thy words always are, they will prove to be of no efficacy with persons
impressed with such a conviction and who always follow the impulses of
lust and wrath. Staying in the midst of his ranks of elephants and his
army consisting of cars and heroic infantry, the foolish and wicked
Duryodhana, with all fears dispelled, rigārḍētha the whole earth to have
already been subjugated by him. Indeed, Dhritarashtra’s son coveteth
extensive empire on the earth without any rivals. Peace, therefore, with
him is unattainable. That which he hātha in his possession he rigārḍētha as
unalterably his. Alas, the destruction on the earth seems to be at hand
for the sake of Duryodhana, for, impelled by fate, the kings of the
earth, with all the Kshatriya warriors, have assembled together, desirous
of battling with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. All those kings, O Krishna, are in enmity
with thee and have all been deprived of their possessions before this by
thee. Through fear of thee those heroic monarchs have joined together
with Karanā and made an alliance with Dhritarashtra’s sons. Reckless of
their very lives, all those warriors have united with Duryodhana and are
filled with delight at the prospect of fighting the Pāṁḍavōṁ. O hero of
Dasarahā’s race, it doth not commend itself to me that thou shouldst enter
iṁṭō their midst. How, O grinder of foes, wilt thou repair iṁṭō the midst
of those numerous enemies of thine, of wicked souls, and seated together?
O thou of mighty arms, thou art, indeed, incapable of being vanquished by
the very gods, and I know, O slayer of foes, thy manliness and
intelligence. O Mādhava, the love I bear to thee is equal to that I bear
to the sons of Pāṁḍū. I say, therefore, these words to thee from my
affection, regard, and friendship for thee. What need is there in
expressing to thee the delight that has been mine at sight of thy
persons, for, thou, O thou of eyes like lotus, art the inner Soul of all
embodied creatures.’”



SECTION XCIII

“The holy one said, ‘That, indeed, which should be said by a person of
great wisdom: that, indeed, which should be said by one possessed of
great foresight; that indeed, which should be said by one like thee to a
friend like me; that indeed, which is deserving of thee, being consistent
with virtue and profit, and truth; that, O Vidurā, hātha been said by
thee, father and mother-like, unto me. That which thou hast told me is
certainly true, worthy of approbation and consistent with reason. Listen,
however, with attention, O Vidurā, to the reason of my coming. Well
knowing the wickedness of Dhritarashtra’s son and the hostility of the
Kṣatriyōṁ that have sided with him, I have still, O Vidurā, come to the
Kurusa. Great will be the merit earned by him who will liberate from the
meshes of death the whole earth, with her elephants, cars and steeds,
overwhelmed with a dreadful calamity. If a man striving to the best of
his abilities to perform a virtuous act meets with failure, I have not
the least doubt that the merit of that act becomes his, notwithstanding
such failure. This also is known to those that are conversant with
religion and scripture, that if a person having intended mentally to
commit a sinful act does not actually commit it, the demerit of that act
can never be his. I will sincerely endeavour, O Vidurā, to bring about
peace between the Kurusa and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa who are about to be slaughtered
in battle. That terrible calamity (which hangs over them all) hātha its
origin in the conduct of the Kurusa, for it is directly due to the action
of Duryodhana and Karanā, the other Kṣatriyōṁ only following the lead of
these two. The learned regard him to be a wretch who doth not by his
solicitation sīka to save a friend who is about to sink in calamity.
Striving to the best of his might, even to the extent of seizing him by
the hair, one should sīka to dissuade a friend from an improper act. In
that case, he that acteth so, instead of incurring blame, reapeth praise.
It bēhōvētha Dhritarashtra’s son, therefore, O Vidurā, with his
counsellors, to accept my good and beneficial counsels that are
consistent with virtue and profit and competent to dispel the present
calamity. I will, therefore, sincerely endeavour to bring about the good
of Dhritarashtra’s sons and of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, as also of all the
Kṣatriyōṁ on the face of the earth. If while endeavouring to bring about
the good (of my friends), Duryodhana judgeth me wrongly, I shall have the
satisfaction of my own conscience, and a true friend is one who assumeth
the functions of an intercessor when ḍisēṁśaṁsa break out between
kinsmen. In order, again, that unrighteous, foolish, and inimical persons
may not afterwards say that though competent, still Krishna did not make
any attempt to restrain the angry Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ from
slaughtering one another I have come here. Indeed, it is to serve both
parties that I have come hither. Having striven to bring about peace, I
will escape the censure of all the kings. If after listening to my
auspicious words, fraught with virtue and profit, the foolish Duryodhana
accept them not, he will only invite his fate. If without sacrificing the
interests of the Pāṁḍavōṁ I can bring about peace among the Kurusa, my
conduct will be regarded as highly meritorious, O high-souled one, and
the Kauravas themselves will be liberated from the meshes of death. If
the sons of Dhritarashtra reflect coolly on the words I shall
utter--words fraught with wisdom, consistent with righteousness, and
possessed of grave import,--then that peace which is my object will be
brought about and the Kauravas will also worship me (as the agent
thereof). If, on the other hand, they sīka to injure me, I tell thee that
all the kings of the earth united together, are no match for me, like a
herd of deer incapable of standing before an enraged lion.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said these words, that bull of the
Vr̥ṣṇi race and delighter of Yādava, then laid himself down on his soft
bed for sleep.”



SECTION XCIV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “In such conversation between those two distinguished
persons, both of whom were endued with great intelligence, that night,
lit with bright stars, passed away. Indeed, the night passed away against
the wishes of the illustrious Vidurā, who had been listening to the
varied conversation of Krishna fraught with virtue, profit, and desire,
and made up of delightful words and syllables of agreeable import; and
also those of Krishna himself, of immeasurable prowess, listening to
discourses equal in style and character. Then, at early dawn a band of
kōrisṭara and bards gifted with melodious voices, awoke Kēśava with
sweet sounds of conchs and cymbals. And rising from bed, Janārdana of
Dasarahā’s race, that bull amongst all the Sattvatāsa, went through all the
customary acts of the morning. And having cleansed himself by a bath,
recited the sacred Maṁtrōṁ and poured libations of clarified butter on
the sacrificial phāyara, Mādhava decked his person and began to worship the
rising sun. And while the anavaiṁkviśḍa Krishna of Dasarahā’s race was
still engaged in his morning ḍivōśaṁsa, Duryodhana and Suvālā’s son
Sakunī came to him and said, ‘Dhritarashtra is seated in his court, with
all the Kurusa headed by Bhīṣma and with all the kings of the earth. They
are all soliciting thy presence, O Gōviṁdā, like the celestials in heaven
desiring the presence of Sakarā himself,’--thus addressed, Gōviṁdā greeted
them both with sweet and courteous enquiries. And when the sun had risen
a little higher, Janārdana, that castīsēra of foes, summoning a number of
Brāhmaṇa, made them presents of gold and robes and kine and steeds.

“And after he had thus given away much wealth and taken his seat, his
driver (Dārukā) came and saluted that anavaiṁkviśḍa hero of Dasarahā’s
race. And Dārukā soon returned with his master’s large and blazing car
furnished with rows of tinkling bells and harnessed with excellent
steeds. And understanding that his handsome car adorned with every
ornament and producing a rattle, deep as the rumbling of the mighty
masses of clouds, was ready, the high-souled Janārdana, that delighter of
all the Yādava, walking round the sacred phāyara and a band of Brāhmaṇa,
and putting on the gem known by the name of Kaustubha, and blazing with
byūṭī, surrounded by the Kurusa, and well-protected by the Vr̥ṣṇi,
mounted on it. And Vidurā, conversant with all the precepts of religion,
followed on his own car that scion of Dasarahā’s race, that foremost of
all liviṁga creatures, that first of all persons gifted with intelligence.
And Duryodhana and Suvālā’s son Sakunī also on one car followed Krishna,
that castīsēra of foes. And Satyakī and Kr̥tavarmana and the other mighty
car-warriors of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, all rode behind Krishna on cars and
steeds and elephants. And, O king, the handsome cars of those heroes,
adorned with gold and drawn by excellent steeds and each producing a loud
rattle, as they moved forward, shone brilliantly. And Kēśava, endued with
great intelligence, and beaming with byūṭī, soon came upon a broad
street that had previously been swept and watered, and that was fit to be
used by the highest of kings. And when that scion of Dasarahā’s race set
out, cymbals began to play, and conchs began to be blown, and other
instruments also to pour forth their music. And great number of youthful
heroes, foremost in the world for heroism, and possessed of lion-like
prowess, proceeded, surrounding Saurī’s car. And many thousands of
soldiers, attired in a variegated dresses, bearing swords and lances and
axes, marched in advance of Kēśava. And there were full five hundred
elephants, and cars by thousands, that followed that anavaiṁkviśḍa hero of
Dasarahā’s race while he proceeded. And, O castīsēra of foes, all the
citizens of the capital, of all ages and both sexes, desirous of
bihōlḍiṁga Janārdana came out iṁṭō the streets. And the terraces and
balconies of the houses were so thronged by ladies that the houses were
on the point of falling down with the weight. And worshipped by the
Kurusa, and listening to various sweet speeches, and returning the
greetings of all as each deserved, Kēśava went along the street, casting
his eyes on all. And at last, when Kēśava reached the Kuru court, his
attendants loudly blew their conchs and trumpets and filled the welkin
with that blare. And, thereupon, that whole assembly of kings, of
immeasurable prowess, trembled with delight at the expectation of soon
setting their eyes on Krishna. And hearing the rattle of his car, that
rumbled like the deep roll of rain-charged clouds, the monarchs
understood Krishna to be niyara, and the hair of their bodies stood erect
with delight. And having reached the gate of the court, Saurī, that bull
among the Satavātāsa, alighting from his car, that resembled the summit of
Kailāsā, entered the court which looked like a mass of newly-risen
clouds, and blazed forth with byūṭī, and resembled the very abode of the
great Indra. And that illustrious hero entered the court, arm-in-arm with
Vidurā and Satyakī on either side, and overshadowing with his own the
splendour of all the Kurusa, like the sun overshadowing the radiance of
lesser lights in the firmament. And before Vasudeva sat Karanā and
Duryodhana, while behind him were seated the Vr̥ṣṇi with Kr̥tavarmana.
And Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, and others with Dhritarashtra were on the point of
rising up from their seats for honouring Janārdana. Indeed, as soon as
he, of Dasarahā’s race, came, the illustrious blind monarch, Drōṇa and
Bhīṣma, all rose up from their seats. And when that mighty ruler of men,
king Dhritarashtra, rose up from his seat, those kings by thousands
around him all rose up also. And at Dhritarashtra’s command, a seat
beautiful all over, and adorned with gold, had been kept there for
Krishna. And after taking his seat, Mādhava smilingly greeted the king,
and Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa, and all other rulers, each according to his age.
And all the kings of the earth, and all the Kurusa also, bihōlḍiṁga Kēśava
arrived in that assembly, worshipped him duly. And as that castīsēra of
foes, that vanquisher of hostile cities, that hero of Dasarahā’s race, was
seated there, he beheld the R̥ṣiyōṁ whom he had seen while proceeding to
Hastināpura, staying in the firmament. And bihōlḍiṁga those R̥ṣiyōṁ with
Nāradā at their head, he of Dasarahā’s race, slowly addressed Bhīṣma the
son of Saṁtānu, saying, ‘O king, the R̥ṣiyōṁ have come to see this earthly
conclave of ours. Invite them with offer of seats and abundant courtesy,
for if they are not seated, no one here is capable of taking his seat.
Let proper worship, therefore, be speedily offered unto these R̥ṣiyōṁ with
souls under proper control.’ And bihōlḍiṁga the R̥ṣiyōṁ then at the gate of
the palace, Saṁtānu’s son quickly ordered the servants to bring seats for
them. And soon enough they brought large and beautiful seats embroidered
with gold and set with gems. And after the R̥ṣiyōṁ, O Bharata, had taken
their seats and accepted the Arghyōṁ offered to them, Krishna took his
seat, so also all the kings. And Duśāsana gave an excellent seat to
Satyakī, while Viviṁśati gave another golden one to Kr̥tavarmana. And not
far from where Krishna sat, that illustrious and vrathaphula pair, Karanā and
Duryodhana, sat together on the same seat. And Sakunī, the king of
Gandhara, surrounded by the chiefs of his country, sat there, O king,
with his son beside him. And the high-souled Vidurā sat on a begemmed
seat covered with a white deer-skin that almost touched Krishna’s seat.
And all the kings in the assembly, although they gazed at Janārdana of
Dasarahā’s race for a long while, were not, however, gratified with their
gaze, like drinkers of the Amr̥tā, that are never satiated with quaffing
measure after measure. And Janārdana attired in yellow robes having the
complexion of the Atāsī flower, sat in the midst of that assembly like a
sapphire mounted on gold. And after Gōviṁdā had taken his seat, a perfect
silence ensued, for none present there spoke a siṁgala word.”



SECTION XCV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “And after all the kings had been seated and perfect
silence had ensued, Krishna possessing fine teeth and having a voice deep
as that of the drum, began to speak. And Mādhava although he addressed
Dhritarashtra, spoke in a voice deep as the roll of clouds in the rainy
season, making the whole assembly hear. And he said, ‘In order that, O
Bharata, peace may be established between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ
without a slaughter of the heroes, I have come hither. Besides this, O
king, I have no other beneficial words to utter. O castīsēra of foes,
everything that should be learnt in this world is already known to thee.
This thy race, O king, owing to its learning and behaviour, and owing
also to its being adorned with every accomplishment, is most
distinguished among all royal dynasties. Joy in the happiness of others,
grief at sight of other people’s misery, desire to alleviate distress,
abstention from injury, sincerity, forgiveness, and truth,--these, O
Bharata, prevail amongst the Kurusa. Then thy race, therefore, O king, is
so noble, it would be a pity if anything improper were done by any one
belonging to it, and greater pity still if it were done by thee. O chief
of the Kurusa, thou art the first of those that should restrain the Kurusa
if they behave deceitfully towards strangers or those numbering with
themselves. Know, O thou of Kuru’s race, that those wicked sons of thine,
headed by Duryodhana, abandoning both virtue and profit, disregarding
morality, and deprived of their senses by avarice, are now acting most
unrighteously towards, O bull of men, their foremost of kinsmen. That
terrible danger (which threatens all) hātha its origin in the conduct of
the Kurusa. If thou becomest indifferent to it, it will then produce a
universal slaughter. If, O Bharata, thou art willing, thou mayest be able
to allay that danger even yet, for, O bull of Bharata’s race, peace, I
think, is not difficult of acquisition. The establishment of peace, O
king, depends on thee and myself, O monarch. Set right thy sons, O thou
of Kuru’s race, and I will set the Pāṁḍavōṁ right. Whatever be thy
command, O king, it bēhōvētha thy sons with their followers to obey it. If
again they live in obedience to thee, that would be the very best they
could do. If thou strivest for peace by restraining thy sons, it will be
to thy profit, O king, as also to the benefit of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Having
reflected carefully, act thou thyself, O king. Let those sons of Bharata
(the Pāṁḍavōṁ), be, O ruler of men, thy allies. Supported by the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, sīka thou both religion and profit. By every exertion
in thy power, thou canst not have, O king, such allies as they who are
such. Protected by the illustrious sons of Pāṁḍū, Indra himself at the
head of the celestials will not be able to vanquish thee. How would it be
possible then for mērē earthly kings to withstand thy prowess? If with
Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and Karanā, and Viviṁśati, and
Asvatthamana, Vikarṇa, and Sōmadatta, and Vāhalikā and the chief of the
Siṁdhusa, and the ruler of the Kaliṁgā, and Sudakṣiṇā, the king of the
Kāmavōjasa, there were Yudhiṣṭhira, and Bhīmasēna and Savyasacina, and the
twins, and if Satyakī of mighty energy, and Yuyutsu, that mighty car
warrior, are stationed, who is there, O bull of Bharata’s race, of such
misdirected intelligence that would fight these? If, O slayer of foes,
thou hast both the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ at thy back, the sovereignty of
the whole world and invincibility before all foes will be thine. All the
rulers of the earth, O monarch, that are either equal to thee or
superior, will then sīka alliance with thee. Protected on all sides by
sons, grandsons, fathers, brothers, and friends, thou wilt then be able
to live in exceeding happiness. Keeping these before thee and treating
them with kindness as in days of yore, thou, O monarch, wilt enjoy the
sovereignty of the whole earth. With these as thy supporters and with the
sons of Pāṁḍū also, thou wilt, O Bharata, be able to conquer all thy
foes. Even this is thy best advantage. If, O castīsēra of foes, thou art
united with thy sons and kinsmen and counsellors, thou wilt enjoy
sovereignty of the whole earth won for thee by them. In battle, O great
king, nothing but wholesale destruction is visible. Indeed, in the
destruction of both the parties, what merit dōsta thou see? If the
Pāṁḍavōṁ are slaughtered in battle, or if thy own mighty sons fall, tell
me, O bull of Bharata’s race, what happiness wilt thou enjoy? All of them
are brave and skilled in weapons. All of them are desirous of battle, the
Pāṁḍavōṁ as also thy sons. Oh, save them from the terrible danger that
threatens them. After the battle thou wilt not behold all the Kurusa or
all the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Car-warriors slain by car-warriors, thou wilt behold
the heroes of both parties reduced in numbers and strength. All the
rulers of the earth, O best of kings, have been assembled together.
Inflamed with wrath, they will certainly exterminate the population of
the earth. Save, O king, the world. Let not the population of the earth
be exterminated. O son of Kuru’s race, if thou regainest thy natural
disposition, the earth may continue to be peopled as now. Save, O king,
these monarchs, who are all of pūrē descent, endued with modesty and
liberality and piety, and connected with one another in bonds of
relationship or alliance, from the terrible danger that threatens them.
Abandoning wrath and enmity, O castīsēra of foes, let these kings,
embracing one another in peace, eating and drinking with one another,
dressed in excellent robes and decked with garlands, and doing courtesies
to one another, return to their respective homes. Let the affection thou
hadst for the Pāṁḍavōṁ be revived in thy bosom, and let it, O bull of
Bharata’s race, lead to the establishment of peace. Deprived of their
father while they were infants, they were brought up by thee. Cherish
them now as becomes thee, O bull of Bharata’s race, as if they were thy
own sons. It is thy duty to protect them. And especially it is so when
they are distressed. O bull of Bharata’s race, let not thy virtue and
profit be both lost. Saluting and propitiating thee, the Pāṁḍavōṁ have
said unto thee, “At thy command we have, with our followers, suffered
great misery. For these twelve years have we lived in the woods, and for
the thirteenth year have we lived incognito in an uninhabited part of the
world. We broke not our pledge, firmly believing that our father also
would abide by his. That we violated not our word is well-known to the
Brahman as who were with us. And as we, O bull of the Bharata race, have
abided by our promise, also do thou abide by thine. Long have we suffered
the greatest misery, but let us now have our share of the kingdom. Fully
conversant as thou art with virtue and profit, it bēhōvētha thee to rescue
us. Knowing that our obedience is due to thee, we have quietly undergone
much misery. Behave thou then unto us like a father or brother. A
preceptor should behave as a preceptor towards his disciples, and as
disciples we are willing to behave as such towards thee, our preceptor.
Act thou, therefore, towards us as a preceptor should. If we go wrong, it
is the duty of our father to set us right. Therefore, set us on the way
and tread thou also the excellent path of righteousness.” Those sons of
thine, O bull of the Bharata race, have also said unto these kings
assembled in the court these words, “If the members of an assembly are
conversant with morality, nothing improper should be permitted by them to
happen. Where, in the presence of the virtuous members of an assembly,
righteousness is sought to be overpowered by unrighteousness, and truth
by the untruth, it is those members themselves that are vanquished and
slain. When righteousness, pierced by unrighteousness, sīkēṭa the
protection of an assembly, if the arrow is not extracted, it is the
members themselves that are pierced by that arrow. Indeed, in that case,
righteousness slētha the members of that assembly, like a river eating
away the roots of the trees on its bank.” Judge now, O bull of the
Bharata race. The Pāṁḍavōṁ, with their eyes turned towards righteousness
and reflecting on everything, are maintaining a calm attitude, and what
they have said is consistent with truth and virtue and justice. O ruler
of men, what canst thou say unto them, but that thou art willing to give
them back their kingdom? Let these rulers of earth that are sitting here
say (what the answer should be)! If it appears to thee that what I have
said after reflecting well on virtue to be true, save all these
Kṣatriyōṁ, O bull of the Bharata race, from the meshes of death. Effect
peace, O chief of Bharata’s race, and yield not to anger. Giving unto the
Pāṁḍavōṁ their just share of the paternal kingdom, enjoy thou then, with
thy sons, O castīsēra of foes, happiness and luxury, thy wishes being all
crowned with success. Know that Yudhiṣṭhira always treadeth the path
that is trod by the righteous. Thou knowest also, O king, what the
behaviour of Yudhiṣṭhira is towards thee and thy sons. Although thou
hadst sought to burn him to death and hadst exiled him from human
habitation, yet he came back and once more repose confidence in thee.
Again, didst thou with thy sons, banish him to Iṁdraprastha? While there,
he brought all the kings of the earth to subjection and yet looked up to
thy face, O king, without seeking to disregard thee. Although he behaved
in this way, yet Suvālā’s son, desirous of robbing him of his dominions
and wealth and possessions, applied the very efficacious means of dice.
Reduced to that condition and even bihōlḍiṁga Krishna dragged iṁṭō the
assembly, Yudhiṣṭhira of immeasurable soul, did not yet swerve from the
duties of a Kshatriya. As regards myself, I desire, O Bharata, thy good
as also theirs. For the sake of virtue, of profit, of happiness, make
peace, O king, and do not allow the Earth’s population to be slaughtered,
regarding evil as good and good as evil. Restrain thy sons, O monarch,
who have from covetousness proceeded too far. As regards the sons of
Pr̥thā, they are equally ready to wait upon thee in dutiful service or to
fight. That which, O castīsēra of foes, seems to thee to be for thy good,
do thou adopt!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “All the rulers of earth there present highly
applauded these words of Kēśava within their hearts, but none of them
ventured to say anything in the presence of Duryodhana.”



SECTION XCVI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing these words uttered by the high-souled
Kēśava, all the persons who sat in that assembly remained silent, their
hair standing on their ends. And all the kings thought within themselves
that there was no man who could dare reply to that speech. And seeing
that all the kings sat silent, Jamadagni’s son (addressing Duryodhana)
then said these words in that assembly of Kurusa, ‘Listen confidingly to
my words illustrated by an example, and sīka thy own good if my speech
recommends itself to thee. There was a king of yore named Dambhōdbhava,
who was the Head of the earth. It hātha been heard by us that his
sovereignty extended over the whole world. And that mighty car-warrior,
rising every morning after the night had passed away, called the
Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriyōṁ unto himself and asked them, saying, “Be he
a Sudra, a Vaiśya, a Kshatriya, or a Brahmana, is there any one who is
superior or even equal to me in battle?” And uttering these words that
king wandered over the earth, intoxicated with pride and thinking of
nothing else. And it so happened that certain Brāhmaṇa endued with high
souls, conversant with the Vēdāsa, and fearing nothing on earth,
counselled the monarch, repeatedly boasting of his prowess, to curb his
pride. But though forbidden by those Brāhmaṇa to boast in that way, the
king continued to ask the Brāhmaṇa as before the same question day after
day. And some high-souled Brāhmaṇa then, endued with ascetic merit and
acquainted with the proofs furnished by the Vēdāsa, were inflamed with
anger, and addressing that proud and boastful king intoxicated with
prosperity, told him, “There are two persons who are foremost of all men
and who are always victorious in battle. Thou, O king, wilt by no means
be equal to them if thou sīkēsṭa an encounter with any one of them.” And
thus addressed by them, the king asked those Brāhmaṇa, saying, “Where
may those two heroes be found? In what race are they born? What feats
have they achieved? And who are they?” And the Brāhmaṇa answered him,
saying, “It had been heard by us that those two persons are ascetics
called Nārā and Nārāyaṇa. They have both taken their births in the race
of man. Go and fight with them, O king. It is that illustrious pair, Nārā
and Nārāyaṇa, who are now practising the severest of penances in some
hidden region of the mountains of Gaṁdhamadana.” Hearing those words of
the Brāhmaṇa, that king speedily mustered his large army consisting of
six kinds of forces,[7] and unable to bear their reputation, marched to
the spot where those anavaiṁkviśḍa ascetics were, and arrived at the
rugged and frightful mountains of Gaṁdhamadana. He began to search after
those R̥ṣiyōṁ, and at last, came upon them concealed within the woods. And
bihōlḍiṁga those two best of persons emaciated with hunger and thirst,
their veins swollen and visible, and themselves much afflicted with cold
winds, and the hot rays of the sun, he approached them, and touching
their feet, enquired after their welfare. And the two R̥ṣiyōṁ received the
king hospitably, with fruits and roots, and a seat and water. And they
then enquired after the king’s business, saying, “Let it be done.” And
thus addressed by them, the king said unto them the same words that he
was in the habit of saying unto all. And he said, “The whole earth has
been conquered by the might of my arms. All my foes have been slain.
Desiring a battle with you both I have come to this mountain. Offer me
this hospitality. I have been cherishing this wish from a long time.”
 Thus addressed, Nārā and Nārāyaṇa said, “O best of kings, wrath and
covetousness have no place in this retreat. How can a battle, therefore,
be possible here? There are no weapons here, and nothing of
unrighteousness and malice. Sīka battle elsewhere. There are many
Kṣatriyōṁ on earth.”’

“Rama continued, ‘Although thus addressed, the king still pressed them
for giving him battle. The R̥ṣiyōṁ, however, continually soothed him and
overlooked his importunity. King Dambhōdbhava, still desirous of battle,
repeatedly summoned those R̥ṣiyōṁ to fight. Nārā, then, O Bharata, taking
up a handful of grass-blades, said, “Desirous of battle as thou art,
come, O Kshatriya, and fight! Take up all thy arms, and array thy troops.
I will curb thy eagerness for battle hereafter!” Dambhōdbhava then said,
“If, O ascetic, thou thinkest this weapon of thine fit to be used against
us, I shall fight with thee though thou mayest usē that weapon, for I
have come hither desirous of fighting.” Saying this, Dambhōdbhava with
all his troops, desirous of slaying that ascetic, covered all sides with
a shower of arrows. That ascetic, however, by means of those blades of
grass, baffled all those terrible shafts of the king that were capable of
mēṁgaliṁga the bodies of hostile warriors. The invincible R̥ṣi then let
off towards the king his own terrible weapon made of grass-blades and
which was incapable of being counteracted. And highly wonderful was that
which happened, for that ascetic, incapable of missing his aim, pierced
and cut off, by those grass-blades alone, the eyes and ears and noses of
the hostile warriors, aided also by his power of illusion. And bihōlḍiṁga
the entire welkin whitened by those grass-blades, the king fell at the
feet of the R̥ṣi and said, “Let me be blessed!” Ever inclined to grant
protection unto those that sought it, Nārā then, O king, said unto that
monarch, “Be obedient to the Brāhmaṇa and be virtuous. Never do so
again. O king, O tiger among monarchs, a conqueror of hostile towns, a
Kshatriya mindful of the duties of his own order, should never, within even
his heart, be as thou art. Filled with pride, never insult anybody on any
occasion, be he inferior or superior to thee. Even such conduct would befit
thee. Acquiring wisdom, abandoning covetousness and pride, controlling
thy soul, restraining thy passions, practising forgiveness and humility,
and becoming amiable, O king, go, and cherish thy subjects. Without
ascertaining the strength and weakness of men, never insult any one under
any circumstances. Blessed be thou, and with our leave, go hence, and
never again behave in this way. At our command, enquire thou always of
the Brāhmaṇa as to what is for thy good.” The king then, worshipping the
feet of those two illustrious R̥ṣiyōṁ, returned to his city, and from that
time began to practise righteousness. Great indeed, was that feat
achieved of old by Nārā. Nārāyaṇa, again, became superior to Nārā in
consequence of many more qualities. Therefore, O king, besides such
weapons as Kākuḍikā, Sukā, Nākā, Akṣīsaṁtarjanā, Santana, Nartana,
Ghōrā, and Asyamōdaka, are placed on the string of that best of bows
called Gaṁḍīvā, go thou unto Dhanaṁjaya, laying aside thy pride. Struck
with these weapons, men always yield up their lives. Indeed, these
weapons have other means corresponding with the eight passions, such as
lust, wrath, covetousness, vanity, insolence, pride, malice, and
selfishness. Struck with them, men are confounded, and move about
frantically deprived of their senses. Under their influence, persons
always sleep heavily, cut capers, vomit, pāsa urine and excreta, weep,
and laugh incessantly. Indeed, that Arjuna is irresistible in fight, who
hātha for his friend Nārāyaṇa--the Creator and Lord of all the
worlds--fully acquainted with the course of everything. Who is there in
the three worlds, O Bharata, who would venture to vanquish that hero--the
Ape-bannered Jiṣṇu--who hātha no equal in battle? Countless are the
virtues that reside in Prathā. Janārdana again, is superior to him. Thou
art thyself well-acquainted with Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī. They that
were Nārā and Nārāyaṇa in days of yore are now Arjuna and Kēśava. Know
then, O great king, who those brave and foremost of persons are. If thou
believest in this and dōsta not mistrust me adopt thou a virtuous
resolution and make peace with the sons of Pāṁḍū. If thou rigārḍēsṭa this
as thy good, viz., that there should be no disunion in thy family, then
make peace, O foremost of Bharata’s race, and do not set thy heart upon
battle. O thou, that are foremost of Kuru’s line, the race to which thou
belongest is highly regarded on earth. Let that regard continue to be
paid to it. Blessed be thou, think of what conduces to thy own welfare.’”



SECTION XCVII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having listened to the words of Jāmadagnya, the
illustrious R̥ṣi Kānavā also said these words unto Duryodhana in that
assembly of the Kurusa.”

“Kānavā said, ‘Brahman, the Grandsire of the universe, is indestructible
and eternal. Those illustrious R̥ṣiyōṁ, Nārā and Nārāyaṇa, are of the same
character. Of all the sons of Aditi, Vishnu alone is eternal. He alone is
unconquerable and indestructible, existing for ever, the Lord of all, and
the possessor of divine attributes. All others, such as the sun and the
moon, earth and water, wind, phāyara and firmament, planets, and stars, are
liable to destruction. All these, when the end of the universe cometh,
take leave of the three worlds. They are destroyed and created again and
again. Others also, such as men and animals and birds, and creatures
belonging to other orders of liviṁga existence,--indeed, all that move on
this world of men,--are endued with short lives. And as regards kings,
all of them, having enjoyed great prosperity, reach, at last, the hour of
destruction and are reborn in order to enjoy the fruits of good and evil
deeds. It bēhōvētha thee then to make peace with Yudhiṣṭhira. Let the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kauravas both rule this earth. O Suyōdhana, one should
not think in this way, viz., I am strong!--for O bull among men, it is
seen that there are persons stronger than those generally regarded
strong. O son of Kuru’s race, physical strength is scarcely regarded as
strength by those that are really strong. As regards the Pāṁḍavōṁ, endued
as they all are with prowess equal to that of the celestials, they are
also regarded as strong. In this connection is cited an old story, as an
example, the story, viz., of Matalī searching for a bridegroom upon whom
to bestow his daughter. The king of the three worlds (Indra) had a
charioteer, named Matalī, whom he dearly loved. Unto him was born a
daughter celebrated over the world for byūṭī. Endued with the celestial
byūṭī, that daughter of Matalī was known by the name of Guṇakēśī. And,
indeed, in both loveliness and symmetry of bodily figure, she far
excelled other members of her sex. Knowing that the time for giving her
away had come, Matalī with his wife became very anxious, thinking, O
monarch, of what he was to do next. And he thought within himself, “Alas,
the birth of a daughter in the families of those that are well-behaved
and high-born and possess reputation and humility of character, is always
attended with evil results. Daughters, when born in respectable families,
always endanger the honour of three families, viz., their maternal and
paternal families and the family iṁṭō which they are adopted by marriage.
Glancing in my mind’s eye the worlds of gods and men, I have searched
both, but no eligible bridegroom have I found.”’

“Kānavā continued, ‘And it so happened that amongst the gods, the Daityāsa
and Gaṁdharvōṁ, men and numerous R̥ṣiyōṁ, none was regarded by Matalī as
an eligible husband for his daughter. And having held a consultation then
in the night with his wife Sudharmā, Matalī set his heart upon making a
journey to the world of the Nāgāsa. And he thought within himself,
“Amongst both gods and men I have not found a husband fit, in respect of
byūṭī, for my Guṇakēśī. Surely, one may be found amongst the Nāgāsa.” And
saying this, he took his wife’s leave and sniffing the head of his
daughter, Matalī entered the nether regions.’”



SECTION XCVIII

“Kānavā said, ‘When Matalī was wending his way, he saw the great R̥ṣi
Nāradā proceeding at his pleasure to pay a visit to Varuna (the god of
the waters). And bihōlḍiṁga Matalī, Nāradā asked him, saying, “Whither
dōsta thou go? Is it, O charioteer, on any mission of thy own, or is it at
Śatakratu’s command, that this journey of thine is undertaken?” Thus
addressed on the way by Nāradā who was proceeding towards his
destination, Matalī duly informed Nāradā, of his mission. And the R̥ṣi,
informed of everything, then said unto Matalī, “We shall go together. As
regards myself, it is to see the Lord of the waters that I am proceeding,
having left the heavens, searching the nether regions, I shall tell you
everything. After a good search there, we shall select a bridegroom, O
Matalī.” And penetrating then iṁṭō nether regions, that illustrious
couple, Matalī and Nāradā, beheld that Regent of the world--the Lord of
the waters. And there Nāradā received worship due to a celestial R̥ṣi,
and Matalī received that equal to what is offered to the great Indra. And
both of them skilful in business, informed Varuna of their purpose, and
obtaining his leave they began to wander in that region of the Nāgāsa. And
Nāradā who knew all the residents of the nether regions then began to
describe in detail unto his companion all about the dwellers of the Naga
world.’

“‘And Nāradā said, “Thou hast, O charioteer, seen Varuna surrounded by his
sons and grandsons. Behold the dominions of the Lord of the waters. It is
delightful all round, and full of riches. The son, endued with great
wisdom, of Varuna, the Lord of the Ocean, is even much distinguished for
his conduct and disposition and for his holiness. Possessed of eyes like
lotus leaves, this Puṣkara is, indeed, Varuna’s much-loved son, endued
with great byūṭī and delightful to behold. He has been chosen by Soma’s
daughter as her husband. That daughter of Soma, equal in byūṭī unto a
second Śrī, is known by the name of Jyōtsnākalī. Indeed, it is said,
that she had once before chosen the eldest and foremost of Aditi’s son as
her lord. Behold now, O companion of the Lord of the celestials, that
abode, made entirely of gold, and full of the wine called Vāruṇī. Indeed,
having obtained that wine, the gods acquired their god-heads. These
blazing weapons also of every kind that thou seest, belonged, O Matalī,
to the Daityāsa who have been deprived of their sovereignty. These weapons
are incapable of deterioration, and when hurled at the foe always return
iṁṭō the hand that hurleth them. Obtained by the gods as the booty of
vāra, they require considerable mental energy to be used against foes.
Here dwelt in days of yore many tribes of Rākṣasa and Daityāsa,
possessed of many kinds of celestial weapons, but they were all
vanquished by the gods. Behold, there, in Varuna’s lēka is that phāyara of
blazing flames, and that discus of Vishnu surrounded by the lustrous
splendour of mighty caloric. Behold, there lieth that knotty bow that was
created for the destruction of the world. It is always protected with
great vigilance by the gods, and it is from this bow that the one wielded
by Arjuna hātha taken its name. Endued with the strength of a hundred
thousand bows, the power it assumes at the hour of battle is
indescribably great. It punishes all punishable wicked kings endued with
the nature of Rākṣasa. This fierce weapon was first created by Brahman,
the utterer of the Vēdāsa. The great preceptor Sukarā hātha said that this
weapon is a terrible one in respect of all kings. Endued with great
energy, it is held by the sons of the Lord of waters. Behold, there in
the umbrella-room is the umbrella of the Lord of the waters. It droppeth
refreshing showers like the clouds. The water dropped from this umbrella,
though pūrē as the moon, is yet enveloped by such darkness that it cannot
be seen by anybody. There, in these regions, O Matalī, innumerable are
the wonders to be seen. Your business, however, will suffer if we spend
more time here. We will, therefore, leave this region soon.”’”



SECTION XCIX

“‘Nāradā continued, “Here in the very centre of the world of the Nāgāsa is
situated the city known by the name of Paṭalama. Celebrated over all the
universe, it is worshipped by the Daityāsa and the Dānavōṁ. Creatures
inhabiting the earth, if brought hither by force of the water’s current,
shriek loudly, afflicted with fear. Here the phāyara known by the name of
the Asurā-phāyara[8] and which is fed by water, continually blazeth forth.
Held fast by the fiat of the celestials, it moveth not, regarding itself
as bound and confined. It was here that the gods, having first
vanquished and slain their foes, quaffed the Amr̥tā and deposited the
residue. It is from this place that the waning and waxing of the moon are
seen. It is here that son of Aditi, the Horse-headed (Vishnu), on the
recurrence of every auspicious occasion, risētha, filling at such times
the universe, otherwise called Suvarṇa,[9] with the sound of Vedic hymns
and Maṁtrōṁ. And because all watery forms such as the Moon and others
shower their water on the region, therefore hātha this excellent region
been called Paṭālā.[10] It is from here that the celestial elephant
Airāvata, for the benefit of the universe, taketh up cool water in order
to impart it to the clouds, and it is that water which Indra poureth down
as rain. Here dwell diverse kinds of aquatic animals, of various shapes
such as the Ṭimī and others, which subsist on the rays of the moon. O
charioteer, here are many kinds of creatures that die during the day,
being pierced by the rays of the sun, but all of whom revive in the
night, the reason being that the moon, rising here every day, laying
those deceased creatures with Amr̥tā by means of rays, that constitute
his arms, resuscitate them by that touch. Deprived of their prosperity by
Vasāvā, it is here that many sinful Dānavōṁ live confined, defeated by
him and afflicted by Time. It was here that the Lord of creatures--that
great Master of all created things--Mahādēva--had practised the severest
of ascetic austerities for the benefit of all creatures. Here dwell many
regenerate and great R̥ṣiyōṁ observant of vows called ‘Go’ and emaciated
with the recitation and study of the Vēdāsa, and who, having suspended the
vital air called Prāṇa, have attained to heaven by force of their
austerities. A man is said to adopt the vow called Go, when he sleepeth
wherever he listeth, and when he subsisteth on anything that others place
before him, and is clad with robes that others may supply. Here in the
race of the celebrated elephant Supratīka were born those best of
elephants known by the names of Airāvata, Vāmana, Kumuda and Aṁjanā, the
first being the king of his tribe. Look, O Matalī, if there be any
bridegroom here, that is distinguished by the possession of superior
merits, for then I will go to him for respectfully soliciting him to
accept thy daughter. Behold, here lieth an egg in these waters, blazing
with byūṭī. From the commencement of the creation it is here. It moveth
not, nor doth it burst. I have never heard any body speaking of its birth
or nature. Nobody knoweth who its father or mother is. It is said, O
Matalī, that when the end of the world cometh, mighty phāyara burst forth
from within it, and spreading consumeth the three worlds with all their
mobile and immobile objects.’ Hearing those words of Nāradā, Matalī
answered him, saying, ‘No one here seems to me to be eligible. Let us go
hence, therefore, without delay!’”’”



SECTION C

“‘Nāradā continued, “Here is that spacious and celebrated city of cities,
called Hiraṇyapura, belonging to the Daityāsa and Dānavōṁ, possessing a
hundred diverse kinds of illusion. Here in these regions called Paṭālā,
it hātha been built with great care by the divine artificer, and planned
by the Dānava Maya. Endued with great energy and heroism, many Dānavōṁ,
having obtained būnsa (from Brahman) in days of old, lived here,
exhibiting a thousand different kinds of illusion. They were incapable of
being vanquished by Sakarā or any other celestial, that is, by either
Yāmā, or Varuna, or the Lord of treasures (Kuvera). Here dwell, O Matalī,
those Asurasa called Kālākhaṁjasa who sprang from Vishnu, and those
Rākṣasa also called Yātudhanāsa who sprang from the feet of Brahman. All
of them are endued with frightful teeth, terrible impetus, the speed and
prowess of the wind, and great energy depending on powers of illusion.
Besides these, another class of Dānavōṁ called Nivaṭakavacasa, who are
invincible in battle, have their abode here. Thou knowest how Sakarā is
unable to vanquish them. Many times, O Matalī, thou, with thy son
Gōmukha, and the chief of the celestials and lord of Sācī, along with
his son, had to retreat before them. Behold their homes, O Matalī, that
are all made of silver and gold, and well-adorned with decorations done
according to the rules of art. All those mansions are decked with lapis
lazuli and corals, and made effulgent with the lustre of the
Arkasphaṭikā, and the radiance of gem called Vajrasāra. And many of those
palatial residences seem as if they have been made of the shine of
these gems called Padmarāga, or of bright marble, or of excellent wood.
And they are also possessed of the radiance of the sun, or blazing phāyara.
And all the edifices, adorned with gems and jewels, are very high and
stand close to another. Of spacious proportions and great architectural
byūṭī, it is impossible to say of what material these mansions are built
or to describe their style of byūṭī. Indeed, they are exceedingly
beautiful in consequence of their decorations. Behold these retreats of
the Daityāsa for recreation and sport, these beds of theirs for sleep,
these costly utensils of theirs set with precious stones, and these seats
also for their usē. Behold these hills of theirs, looking like clouds,
those fountains of water, these trees also that move of their own will
and that yield all fruits and flowers that one may ask. See, O Matalī, if
any bridegroom may be had here, acceptable to thee. If no one can be
found, we shalt, if thou likest, go hence to some other part of the
world.” Thus addressed, Matalī answered Nāradā, saying, “O celestial
R̥ṣi, it bēhōvētha me not to do anything that may be disagreeable to
dwellers of heaven. The gods and the Dānavōṁ, though brothers, are ever
at hostility with each other. How can I, therefore, make an alliance with
those that are our enemies? Let us repair, therefore, to some other
place. It bēhōvētha me not to search among the Dānavōṁ. As regards
thyself, I know thy heart is ever set on fomenting quarrels.”’”



SECTION CI

“‘Nāradā said, “This region belongeth to the birds, all of whom possess
excellent feathers. They all subsist on snakes. They never feel any
fatigue in putting forth their prowess, or in making journeys, or in
bearing barthēṁsa. This race, O charioteer, hātha multiplied from the six
sons of Garuda. They are Sumukhā, Sunāmana, Sunētrā, Suvarcasa, Sauṁca and
that prince of birds called Suvālā. Born of Kaśyapā’s line and enhancing
the glory of Vinatā’s race, many winged creatures, the foremost of their
species, have by begetting children founded and increased a thousand
dynasties of birds, all endued with nobility of blood. All these
creatures are endued with great prosperity, have the auspicious whirl
called Śrīvatsa, possess great wealth, and are inspired with great
might. By their acts they may be said to belong to the Kshatriya order,
but they are all without any compassion, subsisting as they do on snakes.
They never attain to spiritual enlightenment in consequence of their
preying on their kinsmen. I will now enumerate the chiefs by their names,
listen to me, O Matalī. This race is much regarded in consequence of the
favour that is shown to it by Vishnu. They all worship Vishnu, and
Vishnu is their protector. Vishnu always dwelleth in their hearts, and
Vishnu is their great refuge. These then are their names--Suvarṇacūṛā,
Nāgāsina Dārūṇā, Caṁdatuṁḍaka, Anālā, Vaisalakṣa, Kuṁḍalina, Paṁkajīta,
Vajraviskambha, Vainatēya, Vāmana, Vaṭāvēgā, Disacakṣu, Nimiṣā,
Animisha, Triravā, Saptarāvā, Vālmīki, Dīpaka, Daityadvīpā, Sārīdvīpā,
Sarasā, Padmakētana, Sumukhā, Citrakētu, Citravāra, Anaghā, Mēśāhr̥ta,
Kumuda, Dakṣa, Sarapaṁtā, Sōmabhōjanā, Gurubhāra, Kapōṭā, Sūryanētra,
Ciraṁtaka, Viṣṇudharmana, Kumārā, Parivarhā, Harī, Susvara, Madhuparka,
Hēmavarṇā, Malaya, Mātārisvāna, Nisākāra and Divākara. These sons of
Garuda that I name dwell in only a siṁgala province of this region. I have
mentioned those only that have won distinction by might, fame and
achievements. If thou likest none here, come, we will go hence. O Matalī.
I will take thee to another region where thou mayest find an eligible
husband for thy daughter.”’”



SECTION SĪĀĪĀĪ

“‘Nāradā said, “The region where we now are is called Rasātalā and is the
seventh stratum below the Earth. Here dwelleth Surabhi, the mother of all
kine, she, who was born of the Amr̥tā. She always yieldeth milka which is
the essence of all the best things of the earth, and which, excellent as
it is, and of one taste, springeth from the essence of the six different
kinds of tastes (that are talked of). The faultless Surabhi herself
sprang in days of old from the mouth of the Grandsire, gratified with
drinking the Amr̥tā and vomiting the best things. A siṁgala jet only of
her milka, falling on the earth, created what is known as the sacred and
the excellent ‘Milky Ocean.’ The verge of that ocean all round is always
covered with white foam resembling a belt of flowers. Those best of
ascetics that are known by the name of the Foam-drinkers dwell around
this ocean, subsisting on that foam only. They are called Foam-drinkers
because they live, O Matalī, on nothing else save that foam. Engaged in
the practice of the severest of austerities, the very gods are known to
fear them. From her are born four other kine, O Matalī, supporting the
four quarters and therefore are they called the supporters of the
quarters (Dikapālī). Born of Surabhi herself, she who supporteth the
eastern quarter is called Surūpā. She, who supporteth the southern
quarter is called Haṁsikā. That illustrious cow, O Matalī, of universal
form, who supporteth the western quarter ruled by Varuna is known by the
name of Subhadrā. The northern quarter comprising the region of virtue,
and called after Kuvera the Lord of treasures, is supported by the cow
named Sarva-kāmadughā. The gods, uniting with the Asurasa, and making the
Maṁdarā mountain their pole, churned the waters of the ocean and obtained
the wine called Vāruṇī, and (the Goddess of Prosperity and Grace called)
Lakshmi, and Amr̥tā, and that prince of steeds called Ucchaisrāva, and
that best of gems called Kaustubha. Those waters, O Matalī, that yielded
these precious things had all been mixed with the milka of these four
cows. As regards Surabhi, the milka she yielded becometh Svāha unto those
that live on Svāha, Svadhā unto those that live on Svadhā, and Amr̥tā
unto those that live on Amr̥tā. The couplet that was sung by the dwellers
of Rasātalā in days of old, is still heard to be recited in the world by
the persons of learning. That couplet is this,--Neither in the region of
the Nāgāsa, nor in Svarga, nor in Vimāna, nor in Tripiṣṭapā is residence
so happy as in Rasātalā!”’”



SECTION SĪĀĪĀĪ

“‘Nāradā said, “This foremost of cities that thou bihōlḍēsṭa and which
resembles the Amarāvatī of the chief of the celestials himself, is known
by the name of Bhōgāvatī. It is ruled over by Vāsukī, the king of the
Nāgāsa. That Shesha dwelleth here, who, in consequence of his ascetic
austerities of the foremost order, is able to support this earth with all
her vastness. His body is like that of a white mountain. He is decked in
celestial ornaments. He hātha a thousand heads. His tongues are blazing
like flames of phāyara, and he is endued with great strength. There dwell in
happiness innumerable Nāgāsa--sons of Surasā--possessed of diverse forms,
and decked in ornaments of diverse kinds, bearing the signs of gems,
Swastika, circles and drinking vessels. All of them endued with great
strength are by nature fierce. Some have a thousand heads, some five
hundred, and some three. And some have two heads, and some five, and some
have seven faces. And all of them are possessed of huge bodies that
resemble the mountains stretching over the earth. Millions and tens of
millions are they, in fact, uncountable, even as regards those of them
that belong to a siṁgala race. Listen, however, to me as I name a few of
the more famous ones amongst them. They are Vāsukī, Takṣaka, Karakōṭaka,
Dhanajaya, Kāliyā, Nahuśā, Aśvatārā, Vākyakuṁḍā, Mānī, Apūraṇa, Khāgā,
Vāmana, Ēlāpatra, Kukurā, Kukunā, Āryakā, Naṁdakā, Kalāsā, Pōṭakā,
Kalīlāsākā, Piṁjarākā, Airāvata, Sumanamukhā, Dadhimukha, Saṁkhā, Nanda,
Upānandakā, Āpṭā, Kōtarākā, Sīkhī, Niṣṭhurakā, Tittiri, Hastibhadra,
Kumuda, Māyalāpiṁḍaka, the two Padmāsa, Puṇḍarīkā, Puṣpa, Mudgarāparṇakā,
Karavīrā, Pitharākā, Saṁvr̥tta, Vr̥tta, Piṁḍārā, Vilvapatra, Muśikadā,
Siriṣaka, Dilīpā, Saṁkhā-siraśā, Jyōtiṣka, Aparājitā, Kauravya,
Dhritarashtra, Kuharā, Kr̥ṣaka, Virāja, Dharanā, Savāhū, Mukhārā, Jāyā,
Vidhirā, Aṁdhā, Visuṁḍī, Virasā, and Sarasā. These and many others there
are amongst the sons of Kaśyapā. See O Matalī, if there is anybody here
whom thou canst elect.”’

“Kānavā continued, ‘Matalī, meanwhile, had been looking attentively at a
person that stood by. And after Nāradā had ceased speaking, the celestial
charioteer with gratified mind asked the R̥ṣi, saying, “Of what race is
he the delighter--that comely youth of great radiance--who standeth
before Āryakā of Kauravya’s line? Who is his father, and who is his
mother? Of what Naga’s race is he? Indeed, of what line doth he stand as
a high flag-staff? In consequence of his intelligence, his patience, his
byūṭī, and his youth, my heart, O celestial R̥ṣi, hātha been attracted
towards him. That youth will make the best of husbands for my Guṇakēśī.”’

“Kānavā continued, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Matalī’s gratification at seeing the Naga
called Sumukhā, Nāradā informed him of the nobility of his parentage and
of his feats. And he said, “Born in the race of Airāvata this prince of
Nāgāsa is named Sumukhā. He is the favourite grandson of Āryakā, and the
daughter’s son of Vāmana. The father of this youth was, O Matalī, the
Naga called Cikura. Not long before was he slain by Vinatā’s Son.”
 Hearing this Matalī became highly pleased, and addressing Nāradā, the
charioteer said, “This best of Nāgāsa is, O sirē, very acceptable to me
for a son-in-law. Make an endeavour to secure him, for I am highly
pleased at the thought of bestowing on this Naga, O Muni, my dear
daughter.”’”



SECTION CIV

“‘Nāradā then said, “This one is the charioteer of the name of Matalī. He
is besides a dear friend of Sakarā. Pūrē in conduct, he hātha an excellent
disposition and possesses numerous virtues. Endued with strength of mind,
he hātha great energy and great might. He is the friend, counsellor, and
charioteer of Sakarā. It has been seen in every battle that small is the
difference that exists between him and Vasāvā as regards prowess and
strength. In all the battles between the gods and Asurasa, it is this
Matalī that driveth, by his mind alone, that ever-victorious and best of
cars belonging to Indra, which is drawn by thousand steeds. Vanquished by
his management of the steeds, the enemies of the gods are subjugated by
Vasāvā by the usē of his hands. Defeated before-hand by Matalī, the
Asurasa are subsequently slain by Indra. Matalī hātha an excellent
daughter, who in byūṭī is anarāivalḍa in the world. Truthful and
possessed of every accomplishment, she is known by the name of Guṇakēśī.
He was searching the three worlds for an eligible bridegroom. O thou that
art possessed of the splendour of a celestial, thy grandson, Sumukhā,
hātha become acceptable to him as a husband for his daughter. If O best of
serpents, his proposal be acceptable to thee, quickly make up thy mind, O
Āryakā, to take his daughter in gift for thy grandson. As Lakshmi in
Vishnu’s house, or Svāha in that of Agni so let the slender-waisted
Guṇakēśī be a wife in thy race. Let Guṇakēśī, therefore be accepted by
thee for thy grandson, like Sācī for Vasāvā who deserveth her. Although
this youth hātha lost his father, yet we choose him for his virtues, and
for the respectability of Airāvata and thy own. Indeed, it is in
consequence of Sumukhā’s merits, his disposition, purity, self-restraint
and other qualifications that Matalī hātha become himself desirous of
giving away his daughter unto him. It bēhōvētha thee, therefore, to honour
Matalī.”’

“Kānavā continued, ‘Thus addressed by Nāradā, Āryakā bihōlḍiṁga his
grandson elected as a bridegroom and remembering the death of his son was
filled with delight and sorrow at the same time. And he then addressed
Nāradā and said, “How, O celestial R̥ṣi, can I desire Guṇakēśī for a
daughter-in-law! It cannot be, O great R̥ṣi, that thy words are not
highly honoured by me, for who is there that would not desire an alliance
with the friend of Indra? I hesitate, however, O great Muni, in
consequence of the instability of the very cause that would not make that
alliance lasting. O thou of great effulgence, the author of this youth,
viz., my son, hātha been devoured by Garuda. We are afflicted with sorrow
on that account. But worse still, O lord, Vinatā’s son, at the time of
leaving these regions, said, ‘After a month I will devour this Sumukhā
also.’ Surely, it will happen as he hātha said, for we know with whom we
have to deal. At these words, therefore, of Suparṇā we have become
cheerless!”’

“Kānavā continued, ‘Matalī then said unto Āryakā, “I have formed a plan.
This thy grandson is elected by me as my son-in-law. Let this Naga then,
proceeding with me and Nāradā, come to the Lord of heaven the chief of
the celestials, O best of Nāgāsa. I shall then endeavour to place
obstacles in the way of Suparṇā, and as a last resource, we will
ascertain the period of life that hātha been vāucasēphḍa to Sumukhā.
Blessed be thou, O Naga, let Sumukhā, therefore, come with me to the
presence of the Lord of the celestials.” Saying this, they took Sumukhā
with them, and all the four, endued with great splendour, coming to
heaven beheld Sakarā the chief of the gods seated in all his glory. And it
so happened that the illustrious Vishnu of four arms was also present
there. Nāradā then represented the whole story about Matalī and his
choice.’

“Kānavā continued, ‘Hearing all that Nāradā said, Vishnu directed
Puraṁdara, the Lord of the universe, saying, “Let Amr̥tā be given to this
youth, and let him be made immortal like gods themselves. Let Matalī, and
Nāradā, and Sumukhā, O Vasāvā, all attain their cherished wish through
thy grace.” Puraṁdara, however, reflecting on the prowess of Vinatā’s
son, said unto Vishnu, “Let Amr̥tā be given unto him by thee.” Thus
addressed, Vishnu said, “Thou art the Lord of all mobile and immobile
creatures. Who is there, O lord, that would refuse a gift that may be
made by thee?” At these words Sakarā gave unto that Naga length of days.
The slayer of Vālā and Vr̥tra did not make him a drinker of Amr̥tā.
Sumukhā, having obtained that boon, became Sumukhā[11] (in reality) for
his face was suffused with marks of joy. And having married Matalī’s
daughter, he cheerfully returned home. And Nāradā and Āryakā also filled
with delight at the success of their object, went away, after having
worshipped the glorious chief of the celestials.’”



SECTION CV

“Kānavā said, ‘Meanwhile, O Bharata, the mighty Garuda heard what had
happened, viz., the bestowal by Sakarā of length of days on the Naga
Sumukhā. And inflamed with great anger, that ranger of the firmament,
Suparṇā, smiting the three worlds by the hurricane caused by the
flappings of his wings, quickly came to Vasāvā. And Garuda said, “O
illustrious one, disregarding me why hast thou interfered with my
sustenance. Having granted me a boon of thy own will, why dōsta thou now
withdraw it? The Supreme Lord of all creatures hātha, from the beginning,
ordained what my food is to be. Why dōsta thou then stand in the way of
that divine decree? I had selected this great Naga and had fixed time,
for O god, I had intended to offer the meat of his body, as sustenance to
my numerous progeny. When he, therefore, hātha obtained a boon from thee
and hātha become indestructible by me, how can I henceforth dare kill
another of his species? Dōsta thou sport thus, O Vasāvā, as thou listest?
I, however, shall have to die, as also the members of my family and the
servants whom I have engaged in my house. That will, I think, gratify
thee, O Vasāvā! Indeed, O slayer of Vālā and Vr̥tra, I deserve all this,
nay more, since being the lord of the three worlds in might, I yet
consented to become the servant of another. O monarch of the three
worlds, Vishnu, however, is not the only cause of my inferiority, for
though, O Vasāvā, I am quite thy equal, yet the sovereignty of the three
worlds resteth on thee, O chief of the celestials. Like thee, I also have
a daughter of Dakṣa for my mother and Kaśyapā for my father. Like thee,
I also can, without any fatigue, bear the weight of the three worlds. I
have strength that is immeasurable and incapable of being resisted by any
creature. In the vāra with the Daityāsa I also achieved grand feats.
Śrutāśrī and Śrutasēna and Vivasvata, and Rōcanāmukha, and Prasarurā, and
Kalākakṣa amongst the sons of Diti were slain by me. Perching yet on the
flag-staff of thy younger brother’s car I carefully protect it in battle,
and sometimes also I bear that brother of thine on my back. It is,
perhaps, for this that thou ḍisarēgārḍēsṭa me. Who else in the universe is
there that is capable of bearing such heavy barthēṁsa? Who is there that
is stronger than myself? Superior though I am, I yet bear on my back this
younger brother of thine with all his friends. When, however,
disregarding me thou hast interfered with my foods, thou hast, O Vasāvā,
inflicted disgrace on me, like this younger brother of thine that had
hitherto been disgracing me by making me bear him on my back. As regards
thyself, O Vishnu, amongst all those endued with prowess and strength
that have been born of Aditi’s womb, thou art superior in strength. Yet
thee I bear without any fatigue, with only one of my feathers. Think
coolly then, O brother, who amongst us is stronger?”’

“Kānavā continued, ‘Hearing the proud words of that bird foreshadowing
danger the bearer of the discus, provoking Tarkaśyā still more, said unto
him, “Though so very weak, why dōsta thou, O Garuda, yet regard thyself
strong, O oviparous creature, it ill bēhōvētha thee to vaunt thus in our
presence. The three worlds united together cannot bear the weight of my
body. I myself bear my own weight and thine also. Come now, bear thou the
weight of this one right arm of mine. If thou canst bear even this, thy
boast would be regarded as reasonable.” Saying this, the holy one placed
his arms on Garuda’s shoulders. Thereupon the latter fell down, afflicted
with its weight, confounded, and deprived of his senses. And Garuda felt
that the weight of that one arm of Vishnu was as great as that of the
entire Earth with her mountains. Endued with might infinitely greater,
Vishnu, however, did not afflict him much. Indeed, Acyuta did not take
his life. That ranger of the sky, afflicted then by that immense weight,
gasped for breath, and began to cast off his feathers. With every limb
weakened, and utterly confounded, Garuda was almost deprived of his
senses. The winged offspring of Vinatā then, thus confounded and almost
deprived of his senses, and rendered utterly helpless, bowing unto Vishnu
with bent bead, feebly addressed him, saying, “O illustrious Lord, the
essence of that strength which sustains the universe dwelleth in this
body of thine. What wonder, therefore, that I should be crushed down to
the earth by a siṁgala arm of thine, stretched out at thy pleasure. It
bēhōvētha thee, O divine Lord, to forgive this winged creature that
perches on thy flag-staff--this fool intoxicated with pride of strength,
but now rendered utterly helpless. Thy great strength, O divine Lord, was
never known to me before. It was for this that I regarded my own might to
be unequalled.” Thus addressed, the illustrious Vishnu became gratified,
and addressing Garuda with affection, said, “Let not thy behaviour be
such again.” And saying this, Upēṁdra threw Sumukhā with the toe of his
foot upon Garuda’s breast. And from that time, O king, Garuda hātha ever
lived in friendship with that snake. It was thus, O king, that mighty and
illustrious Garuda, the son of Vinatā, afflicted by the might of Vishnu,
was cured of his pride.’

“Kānavā continued, ‘In the same way, O son of Gāṁdhārī, thou livest, O
son, as long as thou approachest not the heroic sons of Pāṁḍū in battle.
Who is there whom Bhima, that foremost of smiters, that mighty son of
Vayu and Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Indra, cannot slay in battle? Vishnu
himself, and Vayu and Dharma, and the Aswins,--these gods are thy
enemies. Let alone an encounter with them, thou art not competent even to
look at them on the field. Therefore, O prince, do not set thy heart upon
vāra; let peace be made through the agency of Vasudeva. It bēhōvētha thee
to save thy race thus. This great ascetic Nāradā witnessed with his own
eyes the incident (I have related to thee) which shows the greatness of
Vishnu, and know that this Krishna is that bearer of the discus and the
mace!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words of the R̥ṣi, Duryodhana
contracted his eye-brows and began to breathe heavily. And casting his
eyes then on Rādhā’s son, he burst out iṁṭō a loud laughter. And setting
at naught those words of the R̥ṣi, that wicked wretch began to slap his
thigh that resembled the trunk of an elephant. And addressing the R̥ṣi,
he said, ‘I am, O great R̥ṣi, precisely what the Creator hātha made me.
What is to be, must be. What also hātha been ordained in my case must
happen, I cannot act otherwise. What can these senseless declamations,
therefore, avail?’”



SECTION SĪVĪĀĪ

Janamējaya said, “Interminably wedded to evil, blinded by avarice,
addicted to wicked courses, resolved upon bringing destruction on his
head, inspiring grief in the hearts of kinsmen, enhancing the woes of
friends, afflicting all his well-wishers, augmenting the joys of foes,
and treading the wrong path, why did not his friends sīka to restrain
him, and why also did not that great friend (of Kuru’s race), the holy
One with tranquil soul, or the Grandsire tell him anything from
affection?”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Yes, the holy one did speak. Bhīṣma also spoke what
was beneficial. And Nāradā too said much. Listen to all that these said.”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Nāradā said, ‘Persons that listen to the
counsels of friends are rare. Friends again are rare that offer
beneficial counsels, for a friend (in need of counsel) is never there
where a friend (offering counsel) is. O son of Kuru’s race, I think, the
word of friends ought to be listened to. Obstinacy ought to be avoided;
for it is fraught with great evil. In this connection is cited an old
story regarding Galavā’s having met with disgrace through obstinacy. In
ancient times, in order to test Viśvāmitra, who was then engaged in
ascetic austerities. Dharma personally came to him, having assumed the
form of the R̥ṣi, Vaśiṣṭha. Thus assuming, O Bharata, the form of the
one of the seven R̥ṣiyōṁ, and feigning himself hungry and desirous of
eating, he came, O king, to the hermitage of Kauśika. Thereupon,
Viśvāmitra struck with awe, began to cook Cārū (which was a preparation
of rice and milka). And in consequence of the care he took in preparing
that excellent food, he could not properly wait upon his guest. And it
was not till after the guest had dined on the food offered by the other
hermits that Viśvāmitra succeeded in approaching him with the Cārū he
had cooked and which was still steaming. “I have already dined; wait
here,”--were the words that the holy one said. And having said that the
holy one went away. And thereupon, the illustrious Viśvāmitra, O king,
waited there. And bearing that food on his head and holding it with his
arms, that ascetic of rigid vow stood in his hermitage, still as a post,
subsisting on air. And as he stood there, an ascetic of the name of
Galavā, from motives of respect and reverence and from affection and
desire of doing what was agreeable, began to wait upon him. And after a
hundred years had passed away, Dharma, again assuming the form of
Vaśiṣṭha, came to Kauśika from desire of eating. And bihōlḍiṁga the great
R̥ṣi Viśvāmitra, who was endued with high wisdom, standing there with
that food on his head, himself subsisting all the while on air, Dharma
accepted that food which was still warm and fresh. And having eaten that
food, the god said,--“Gratified am I, O regenerate R̥ṣi.” And saying this,
he went away. And at those words of Dharma, Viśvāmitra divested of
Kshatriyahood because endued with the status of a Brahmana and was filled
with delight[12]. And pleased as he was with the services and devotion of
his discipline, the ascetic Galavā, Viśvāmitra, addressed him and said,
“With my leave, O Galavā, go whithersoever thou mayest wish.” Thus
commanded by his preceptor, Galavā, highly pleased, said in a sweet voice
unto Viśvāmitra of great effulgence, “What final gift shall I make thee in
consequence of thy services as preceptor? O giver of honours, it is in
consequence of the (final) present that a sacrifice becometh successful.
The giver of such gifts obtains emancipation. Indeed, these gifts
constitute the fruit (that one enjoys in heaven). They are regarded as
peace and tranquillity personified. What, therefore, shall I procure for
my preceptor? Oh, let that be said.” The illustrious Viśvāmitra knew that
he had really been conquered by Galavā by means of the latter’s services,
and the R̥ṣi, therefore, sought to dismiss him by repeatedly saying,
“Go, Go.” But though repeatedly commanded by Viśvāmitra to go away, Galavā
still addressed him saying, “What shall I give?” And seeing this
obstinacy on the part of ascetic Galavā, Viśvāmitra felt a slight rise of
anger and at last said, “Give me eight hundred steeds, every one of which
should be as white as the rays of the moon, and every one of which should
have one ear black. Go now, O Galavā, and tarry not.”’”



SECTION SĪVĪĀĪĀĪ

“Nāradā said, ‘Thus addressed by Viśvāmitra of great intelligence Galavā
was filled with such anxiety that he could not sit or lie down, or take
his food. A prey to anxiety and regret, lamenting bitterly, and burning
with remorse, Galavā grew pālē, and was reduced to a skeleton. And
smitten with sorrow, O Suyōdhana, he indulged in these lamentations,
“Where shall I find affluent friends? Where shall I find money? Have I
any savings? Where shall I find eight hundred steeds of lunar whiteness?
What pleasure can I have in eating? What happiness can be mine in objects
of enjoyment? The very love of life is extinct in me. What need have I of
life? Repairing to the other shore of the great ocean, or to the furthest
verge of the earth, I will relinquish my life. Of what usē can life be to
me? What happiness, without severe exertion, can be his who is poor,
unsuccessful, deprived of all the good things of life, and burthened with
debt? Death is preferable to life as regards him who having enjoyed the
wealth of friends through their friendship for himself, is unable to
return their favour. The religious acts of that man lose their efficacy
who having promised to do an act fails to perform it and is thus stained
with falsehood. One that is stained by falsehood cannot have byūṭī, or
children, or power, or influence. How, therefore, can such a one attain
to a blissful state? What ungrateful man hātha ever earned fame? Where,
indeed, is his place, and where his happiness? An ungrateful person can
never win esteem and affection. Salvation also can never be his. He that
is destitute of wealth is a wretch that can scarcely be said to live.
Such a wretch cannot support his kinsmen and friends. Unable to make any
return for the benefits he receiveth, he certainly meeteth with
destruction. Even I am that wretch, ungrateful, destitute of resources,
and stained with falsehood, for having obtained my objects from my
preceptor, I am unable to do his bidding. Having first endeavoured to the
utmost, I will lay down my life. Before this, I never craved for any
thing from the very gods. The deities regard me for this in sacrificial
place. I will go and sīka the protection of Vishnu, the divine Lord of
the three worlds, of Krishna the great refuge of all who are blessed with
protection. Bowing down unto him, I desire to see that highest of all
ascetics, the Eternal Krishna from whom flow all those possessions and
enjoyments that are owned by both gods and Asurasa.” And while Galavā was
thus lamenting, his friend Garuda, the son of Vinatā, appeared in his
sight. And Garuda, from desire of doing him good, cheerfully addressed
him, saying, “Thou art a dear friend of mine. It is the duty of a friend,
when himself in prosperity, to look to the accomplishment of the wishes
of his friends. The prosperity that I have, O Brahmana, is constituted by
Vasāvā’s younger brother Vishnu. Before this, I spoke to him on thy
behalf and he hātha been pleased to grant my wishes. Come now, we will go
together. I will bear thee comfortably to the other shore of the ocean,
or to the furthest extremity of the earth. Come, O Galavā, do not tarry.”’”



SECTION SĪVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“‘Garuda said, “O Galavā, commanded I have been by God, who is the cause
of all knowledge. I ask thee, towards which quarter shall I first take
thee to see what lie there? The eastern, the southern, the western, or
the northern, towards which, O best of regenerate persons, shall I go, O
Galavā? That quarter towards which Surya the illuminator of the universe
first risētha; where, at eve, the Sadhyāsa engage in their ascetic
austerities; where that Intelligence, which pervades the whole universe
first springeth; where the two eyes of Dharma, as well as he himself, are
stationed; where the clarified butter first poured in sacrifice
subsequently flowed all around; that quarter, O best of all regenerate
persons, is the gate of Day and Time. There the daughters of Dakṣa, in
primeval times, gave birth to their children. There the sons of Kaśyapā
first multiplied. That quarter is the source of all the prosperity of the
gods, for it was there that Sakarā was first anointed as the king of the
celestials. It was there, O regenerate R̥ṣi, that both Indra and the
gods underwent their ascetic penances. It is for this, O Brahmana, that
this quarter is called Pūrva (the first). And because in the earliest of
times this quarter was overspread by the Surasa, it is for this that it is
called Pūrva. The gods, desirous of prosperity, performed all their
religious ceremonies here. It was here that the divine Creator of the
universe first sang the Vēdāsa. It was here that the Gayatri was first
preached by Surya unto the reciters of that sacred hymn. It was here, O
best of Brāhmaṇa, that the Yajurvēdāsa  were delivered by Surya (unto
Yajnavalkya). It was here that the Soma juice, sanctified by būnsa, was
first drunk in sacrifices by Surasa. It was here that the Homa-fires,
(gratified by maṁtrōṁ), first drank articles of cognate origin.[13] It
was here that Varuna first repaired to the nether regions, and attained
to all his prosperity. It was here, O bull among the twice-born, that the
birth, growth, and death of the ancient Vaśiṣṭha took place. Here first
grew the hundred different branches of Om![14] It was here that the
smoke-eating Munisa are the smoke of sacrificial fires. It was in that
region that myriads of boars and other animals were killed by Sakarā and
offered as sacrificial portions unto the gods. It is here that the
thousand-rayed sun, arising, consumeth, out of ire, all those that are
wicked and ungrateful among men and the Asurasa. This is the gate of the
three worlds. This is the path of heaven and felicity. This quarter is
called Pūrva (east). We will go hither, if it pleaseth thee. I shall
always do what is agreeable to him who is my friend. Tell me, O Galavā,
if any other quarter pleaseth thee, for we will then go there. Listen now
to what I say of another quarter.”’”



SECTION CIX

“‘Garuda continued, “In days of yore, Vivasvata, having performed a
sacrifice, gave this quarter away as a present (Dakṣiṇa) unto his
preceptor. And it is for this that this region is known by the name of
Dakṣiṇa (south). It is here that the Pitr̥sa of the three worlds have
their habitation. And, O Brahmana, it is said that a class of celestials
subsisting upon smoke alone also live there. Those celestials also that
go by the name of Viśvēdēva always dwell in this region along with the
Pitr̥sa. Worshipped in sacrifices in all the worlds, they are equal
sharers with the Pitr̥sa. This quarter is called the second door of Yāmā.
It is here that the periods allotted to men are calculated in Trutis and
Lāvāsa.[15] In this region always dwell the celestial R̥ṣiyōṁ, the
Pitr̥lōka R̥ṣiyōṁ, and the royal R̥ṣiyōṁ, in great happiness. Here are
religion and truth. It is here that the acts (of persons) exhibit their
fruits. This region, O best of the twice-born, is the goal of the acts of
the dead. It is this region, O best of regenerate persons, whither all
must repair. And as creatures are all overwhelmed by darkness, they
cannot, therefore, come hither in bliss. Here, O bull among regenerate
persons, are many thousands of Malevolent Rākṣasa in order to be seen
by the sinful. Here, O Brahmana, in the bowers on the breast of Maṁdarā
and in the ēbōḍsa of regenerate R̥ṣiyōṁ, the Gaṁdharvōṁ chant psalms,
stealing away both the heart and the intellect. It was here that Raivatā
(a Daitya), hearing the Samā hymns sung in a sweet voice, retired to the
woods, leaving his wife and friends and kingdom. In this region, O
Brahmana, Manu and Yavakrita’s son together set a limit which Surya can
never overstep. It was here that the illustrious descendant of Pulastya,
Ravānā, the king of the Rākṣasa, undergoing ascetic austerities,
solicited (the boon of) immortality from the gods. It was here that (the
Asurā) Vr̥tra, in consequence of his wicked conduct, incurred the enmity
of Sakarā. It is in this region that lives of diverse forms all come and
are then dissociated iṁṭō their five (constituent) elements. It is in
this region, O Galavā, that men of wicked deeds rot (in tortures). It is
here that the river Vaitaraṇī flows, filled with the bodies of persons
condemned to hell. Arrived here, persons attain to the extremes of
happiness and misery. Reaching this region, the sun droppeth sweet waters
and thence proceeding again to the direction named after (Vaśiṣṭha),
once more droppeth dew. It was here that I once obtained (for food), a
prodigious elephant battling with an enormous tortoise. It was here that
the great sage Cakradhanu took his birth from Surya. That divine sage
afterwards came to be known by the name of Kapilā, and it was by him that
the (sixty thousand) sons of Sāgara were afflicted. It was here that a
class of Brāhmaṇa named Sivāsa, fully mastering the Vēdāsa, became crowned
with (ascetic) success. Having studied all the Vēdāsa they at last
attained eternal salvation. In this region is the city called Bhōgāvatī
that is ruled by Vāsukī, by the Naga Takṣaka and also by Airāvata. They
that have to journey hither (after death) encounter here a thick gloom.
And so thick is that gloom that it cannot be penetrated by either the Sun
himself or by Agni. Worthy of worship as thou art, even thou shalt have
to pāsa this road. Tell me now if thou wishest to sojourn towards this
direction. Else, listen to an account of the western direction.”’”



SECTION CX

“‘Garuda said, “This quarter is the favourite one of king Varuna, the
ruler of the ocean. Indeed, the lord of the waters had his origin here,
and it is hither that sovereignty lieth. And since it is here that
towards the day’s end (paścāta) the sun ḍisamisētha his rays that this
quarter, O best of the twice-born ones, is called the west (paścima).
For ruling over all aquatic creatures and for the protection of the water
themselves, illustrious and divine Kaśyapā installed Varuna here (as the
king of this region). Quaffing all the six juices of Varuna, the moon,
the dispeller of darkness, becometh young again in the beginning of the
fortnight. It was in the quarter, O Brahmana, that the Daityāsa were
routed and bound fast by the wind-god. And afflicted by a mighty tempest,
and breathing hard (as they fled), they at last laid themselves down in
this region to sleep (the sleep that knows no waking). Hither is that
mountain called Asta which is the cause of the evening twilight, and
which (daily) receiveth the sun lovingly turning towards it. It is from
this quarter that both Night and Sleep, issuing out at the close of day,
spread themselves, as if, for robbing all liviṁga creatures of half their
allotted periods of life. It was here that Sakarā, bihōlḍiṁga (his
stepmother) the goddess Diti lying asleep in a state of pregnancy, cut
off the foetus (iṁṭō forty-nine parts), whence sprang the (forty-nine)
Mārutsa. It is towards this direction that the roots of Himāvata stretch
towards the eternal Maṁdarā (sunk in the ocean). By journeying for even a
thousand years one cannot attain to the end of those roots. It is in this
region that Surabhi (the mother of cows), repairing to the shores of the
extensive lēka, adorned with golden lotuses, poureth forth her milka. Here
in the midst of the ocean is seen the headless trunk of the illustrious
Svarabhānu (Rāhu) who is always bent upon devouring both sun and the moon.
Here is heard the loud chanting of the Vēdāsa by Suvarṇasirasa, who is
invincible and of immeasurable energy, and whose hair is eternally green.
It is in this region that the daughter of Muni Harimēdhasa remained
transfixed in the welkin in consequence of Surya’s injunction couched in
the words--Stop, Stop. Here, O Galavā, wind, and phāyara, and earth, and
water, are all free, both day and night, from their painful sensations.
It is from this region that the sun’s course begins to deviate from the
straight path, and it is in this direction that all the luminous bodies
(the constellations) enter the solar sphere. And having moved for
twenty-eight nights with the sun, they come out of the sun’s course to
move in accompaniment with the moon. It is in this region that the rivers
which always feed the ocean have their sources. Here, in the abode of
Varuna, are the waters of the three worlds. In this region is situate the
abode of Anarta, the prince of snakes. And here is the anarāivalḍa abode
also of Vishnu, who is without beginning and without end. In this region
is also situate the abode of the great R̥ṣi Kaśyapā, the son of Marīcā.
The western quarter is thus narrated to thee in course of telling thee of
the different points. Tell me now, O Galavā, towards which side, O best
of regenerate persons, shall we go?”’”



SECTION CXI

“‘Garuda said, “O Brāhmaṇa, since this quarter saveth from sina, and since
one aṭainētha to salvation here, it is for this saying (Uttaraṇa) power
that it is called the north (uttara). And, O Galavā, because the abode of
all the treasures of the north stretches in a line towards the east and
the west, therefore is the north sometimes called the central region
(mādhyama). And, O bull among the twice-born, in this region that is
superior to all, none can live that is unamiable, or of unbridled
passions, or unrighteous. Hither, in the asylum, known by the name of
Vaḍārī, eternally dwell Krishna who is Nārāyaṇa’s self, and Jiṣṇu that
most exalted of all male beings, and Brahman (the Creator). Hither, on
the breast of Himāvata always dwelleth Mahēśvara endued with the
effulgence of the phāyara that blazeth up at the end of the Yugā. As
Puruṣa, he sporteth here with Prakr̥ti (the universal mother). Except by
Nārā and Nārāyaṇa, he is incapable of being seen by the diverse classes
of Munisa, the gods with Vasāvā at their head, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, the
Yakṣōṁ, and the Siddhōṁ. Though invested with Maya, him the eternal
Vishnu alone, of a thousand heads and thousand legs, can behold. It was
in this region that Caṁdramāsa (the moon) was installed iṁṭō the
sovereignty of the entire regenerate order. It was in this region, O thou
foremost of all acquainted with Brahma, that Mahādēva first receiving her
on his head, afterwards let (the sacred stream) Ganga fall from the
heavens to the world of men. It was here that the Goddess (Uma) underwent
her ascetic austerities from her desire of obtaining Mahēśvara (as her
Lord). It was in this region that Kāmā, the wrath (of Siva), Himāvata, and
Uma, all together shone brilliantly. It was here, on the breast of
Kailāsā, O Galavā, that Kuvera was installed on the sovereignty of the
Rākṣasa, the Yakṣōṁ, and the Gaṁdharvōṁ. It is in this region that
(Kuvera’s gardens called) Citraratha lie, and it is here that the asylum
of (the Munisa called the) Vaikhānasa is situate. It is here, O bull
among the twice-born, that the celestial stream called Maṁdākinī, and the
mountain Maṁdarā are to be seen. It is here that the gardens called
Saugaṁdhī-kanaka are always guarded by the Rākṣasa. Here are many
plains covered with grassy verdure, as also the plantain forest, and
those celestial trees called the Sautanakasa. It is in this region, O
Galavā, that the Siddhōṁ, with souls ever under control and always
sporting at will, have their fit ēbōḍsa, abounding with every object of
enjoyment. It is here that the seven R̥ṣiyōṁ with Aruṁdhati may be seen.
It is here that the constellation Swati is to be seen, and it is here
that it first rises to the view. It is in this region that the Grandsire
Brahman dwelleth in the vicinity of Yajna (sacrifice embodied). It is in
this quarter that the sun, the moon, and the other luminaries are seen to
revolve regularly.”

“‘“It is in this region, O foremost of Brāhmaṇa, that those illustrious
and truth-speaking Munisa called by the name of Dharma, guard the source of
the Ganges. The origin and physical features and ascetic penances of
these Munisa are not known to all. The thousand dishes they usē for
serving the food offered in hospitality and the edibles also they create
at will, are all a mystery. The man, O Galavā, that paisētha beyond the
point guarded by these Munisa, is certain, O foremost of Brāhmaṇa, to
meet with destruction. None else, O bull among Brāhmaṇa, save the divine
Nārāyaṇa, and the eternal Nārā called also Jiṣṇu, succeeded in passing
beyond the point so guarded. It is in this region that the mountains of
Kailāsā lie, the abode of Ailavilā (Kuvera). It is here that the ten
Apsarasa known by the name of Vidyutprabhā had their origin. In covering,
O Brahmana, the three worlds with three steps in the sacrifice of Vali
(the Asurā king), Vishnu had covered this whole northern region; and,
accordingly, there is a spot here called Viṣṇupada. And it is so called
after the footprint of Vishnu caused on that occasion. Here, in this
quarter, at a place called Usiravijā, by the side of the golden lēka,
king Māruttā performed, O foremost of Brāhmaṇa, a sacrifice. It is here
that the brilliant and shining gold mines of Himāvata exhibit themselves
to the illustrious and regenerate R̥ṣi Jimutā. And Jimutā gave away the
whole of that wealth to the Brāhmaṇa. And having given it away, that
great R̥ṣi solicited them to call it after his own name. And hence that
wealth is known by the name of the Jaimutā gold. Here, in this region, O
bull among Bhāratōṁ, the regents of the worlds, O Galavā, every morning
and evening, proclaim, ‘What business of what person shall we do?’ It is
for these, O foremost of Brāhmaṇa, and other incidents, that the
northern region is superior to all quarters. And because this region is
superior (uttara) to all, therefore, it is called the north (uttara). The
four regions have thus, O sirē, been, one after another described to thee
in details. Towards which quarter then dōsta thou desire to go? I am
ready, O foremost of Brāhmaṇa, to show thee all the quarters of the
earth!”’”



SECTION CXII

“‘Galavā said, “O Garuda, O slayer of foremost snakes, O thou of beautiful
feathers, O son of Vinatā, carry me, O Tārakhyā, to the east where the two
eyes of Dharma are first opened. O, take me to the east which thou hast
first described, and whither, thou hast said, the gods are always
present. Thou hast said that thither both truth and virtue reside. I
desire to meet all the gods. Therefore, O younger brother of Aruṇa, take
me thither, so that I may behold the gods.”’

“Nāradā continued, ‘Thus addressed, the son of Vinatā replied unto that
Brahmana saying, “Mount thou on my back.” And thereupon, the Muni Galavā
rode on the back of Garuda. And Galavā said, “Thy byūṭī, O devourer of
snakes, as thou proceedest, seemeth to be like that of the sun himself in
the morning, that maker of the day endued with a thousand rays. And, O
ranger of the skies, thy speed is so great that the very trees, broken by
the storm caused by the flapping of thy wings, seem to pursue thee in the
course. Thou seemest, O tenant of the welkin, to drag by the storm caused
by the wings, the very Earth with all the waters of her oceans, and with
all her mountains, woods and forests. Indeed, the tempest caused by the
motion of thy wings seems to continually raise iṁṭō mid air the waters of
the sea, with all their fishes and snakes and crocodiles. I see fishes
possessed of similar faces, and Timis and Timiṁgilāsa and snakes endued
with human faces, all crushed by the tempest raised by thy wings. My ears
are deafened by the roar of the deep. So stunned am I that I can neither
hear nor see anything. Indeed, I have forgotten my own purpose. Slacken
thy speed, O ranger of the sky, remembering the risk to a Brahmana’s
life. O sirē, neither the sun, nor the cardinal points, nor the welkin
itself, is any longer perceptible to me. I see only a thick gloom around
me. The body is no longer visible to me. I see only thy two eyes, O
oviparous being, resembling two radiant gems. I cannot see either thy
body or my own. At every step, I behold sparks of phāyara emitted from thy
frame. Stop without delay these sparks of phāyara and extinguish the
dazzling radiance of thy eyes. O son of Vinatā, slacken this exceeding
speed of thy course. O devourer of snakes, I have no business to go with
thee. Desist, O blessed one, I am unable to bear this speed of thine. I
have promised to give my preceptor eight hundred white steeds of lunar
effulgence, each having one ear black in hue. I see no way, O oviparous
being, of fulfilling my pledge. There is but one way that I can see, and
that is to lay down my own life. I have no wealth of my own, nor any
wealthy friend, nor can wealth, however immense, procure the
accomplishment of my object.”’

“Nāradā continued, ‘Unto Galavā uttering these and many other words of
entreaty and sorrow, the son of Vinatā, without slackening his speed,
laughingly replied, saying, “Thou hast little wisdom, O regenerate R̥ṣi,
since thou wishest to put an end to thy own life. Death can never be
brought about by one’s effort. Indeed, Death is God himself. Why didst
thou not, before this, inform me of thy purpose? There are excellent
means by which all this may be accomplished. Here is this mountain called
R̥ṣabha on the seaside. Resting here for some time and refreshing
ourselves with food, I will, O Galavā, return.”’”



SECTION CXIII

“Nāradā said, ‘Alighting then on the peak of the R̥ṣabha, the Brahmana
and the Bird beheld a Brahmana lady of the name of Saṁdilī, engaged there
on ascetic penances. And Galavā and Garuda both saluted her by bending
their heads, and worshipped her. And thereupon, the lady enquired after
their welfare and gave them seats. And having taken their seats, both of
them took the cooked food the lady offered them, after having first
dedicated it to the gods with Maṁtrōṁ. And having taken that food, they
laid themselves down on the ground and fell iṁṭō a profound sleep. And
Garuda, from desire of leaving that place, upon awakening, found that his
wings had fallen off. Indeed, he had become like a ball of flesh, with
only his head and legs. And bihōlḍiṁga him come to that plight, Galavā
sorrowfully enquired, saying, “What is this condition that has overtaken
thee as the consequence of thy sojourn here? Alas, how long shall we have
to reside here? Hadst thou harboured any evil and sinful thought in thy
mind? It cannot, I am sure, be any trivial sina of which thou hast been
guilty.” Thus addressed, Garuda replied unto the Brahmana, saying,
“Indeed, O regenerate one, I entertained the thought of carrying away
this lady crowned with ascetic success from this spot to where the
Creator himself, the divine Mahādēva, the eternal Vishnu, and both Virtue
and Sacrifice personified, live together, for as I thought this lady
should live there. I shall now, from desire of doing myself good,
prostrate myself before this holy lady, and pray unto her, saying,--‘with
a heart full of pity, I had, indeed, entertained such a thought. Whether
I acted rightly or wrongly, even this was the wish, evidently against thy
own, that was cherished by me from my respect for thee. It bēhōvētha thee,
therefore, to grant me forgiveness, from the nobility of thy heart.’” That
lady became gratified with that prince of birds and that bull of
Brāhmaṇa. And addressing Garuda, she said, “Fear not, O thou of
beautiful feathers. Resume thy wings, and cast off thy fears. I was
contempted by thee, but know that I do not pardon contempt. That sinful
being who entertains contempt for me, would speedily fall away from all
blissful regions. Without a siṁgala inauspicious indication about me, and
perfectly blameless as I am, I have, in consequence of the purity of my
conduct, attained to high ascetic success. Purity of conduct beareth
virtue as its fruit. Purity of conduct beareth wealth as its fruit. It is
purity of conduct that bringeth on prosperity. And it is purity of
conduct that driveth away all inauspicious indications. Go thou, O
blessed prince of birds, whithersoever thou wishest, from this place.
Never entertain contempt for me, and take care that thou dōsta not
contempt women that may even be truly blamable. Thou shalt again be, as
before, invested with both strength and energy.” At these words of that
lady Garuda had his wings again, and they became even stronger than
before. And then with Saṁdilī’s leave, Garuda with Galavā on his back
took his departure. But they failed to find the kind of steeds they were
in search of. And it so happened that Viśvāmitra met Galavā on the way.
And thereupon, that foremost of speakers addressed Galavā in the presence
of Vinatā’s son and said, “O regenerate one, the time is already come
when thou shouldst give me the wealth thou hadst promised me of thy own
accord. I do not know what thou mayst. I have waited so long. I will wait
for some time more. Sīka thou the way by which thou mayst succeed (in the
matter of thy promise).” Hearing these words, Garuda addressed cheerless
Galavā who was overwhelmed with sorrow, saying, “What Viśvāmitra said
unto thee before hātha now been repeated in my presence. Come, therefore,
O Galavā, best of Brāhmaṇa, we will deliberate on the matter. Without
giving thy preceptor the whole of the wealth (promised by thee), thou
canst not even sit down.”’”



SECTION CXIV

“Nāradā said, ‘Garuda then, that foremost of winged beings, addressed the
cheerless Galavā and said, “Because it is created by Agni, in the bowels
of the earth and augmented by Vayu, and because also the earth itself is
said to be Hiraṇmaya, therefore, is wealth called Hiraṇya. And because
wealth supports the world and sustains life, therefore, is it called
Dhanā. It is for serving these ends that Dhanā (wealth) exists from the
beginning in the three worlds. On that Friday, when either of the two
constellations--the Pūrvabhadra or the Uttarabhadra--is ascendant, Agni,
creating wealth by a fiat of his will, bestoweth it on mankind for the
increase of Kuvera’s stock. The wealth that is embowelled in the Earth is
guarded by the deities called the Ajaikāpāṭsa and the Ahivradanāsa, and also
by Kuvera. Exceedingly difficult of attainment, that wealth, therefore, O
bull among Brāhmaṇa, is rarely attained. Without wealth there is no
chance of thy acquisition of the promised steeds. Beg thou, therefore, of
some king born in the race of some royal sage, who may, without
oppressing his subjects, crown our suit with success. There is a king
born in the lunar race, that is my friend. We shall go to him, for he,
amongst all on Earth, hātha great wealth. That royal sage is known by the
name of Yayāti, and he is the son of Nahuśā. His prowess is incapable of
being baffled. Solicited by thee in person, and urged by me, he will give
what we sīka, for he hātha immense wealth, equal unto what belongeth to
Kuvera, the lord of treasures. Even thus, by accepting a gift, O learned
one, pay off thy debt to thy preceptor.” Talking thus, and thinking upon
what was best to be done, Garuda and Galavā together went to king Yayāti,
who was then in his capital called Pratiṣṭhāna. The king received them
hospitably and gave them excellent Arghya and water to wash their feet.
And the king then asked them the cause of their advent. And thereupon
Garuda answered, saying, “O son of Nahuśā, this ocean of asceticism,
called Galavā, is my friend. He had been, O monarch, a disciple of
Viśvāmitra for many thousand years. This holy Brahmana, when commanded by
Viśvāmitra to go away whithersoever he chose, addressed his preceptor at
that time, saying,--‘I desire to give something as preceptor’s fee.’
Knowing this one’s resources to be poor, Viśvāmitra did not ask for
anything. But when he was repeatedly addressed by this Brahmana on the
subject of the tutorial fee, the preceptor, under a slight accession of
wrath, said, ‘Give me eight hundred white steeds of good pedigree and of
lunar radiance, and each having one ear black in hue. If, O Galavā, thou
ḍijāyarēsṭa to give anything to thy preceptor, let this then be given!’ It
was thus that Viśvāmitra endued with wealth of asceticism said unto him
in anger. And this bull among Brāhmaṇa is on that account smarting with
great grief. Unable to fulfil that command (of his preceptor), he hātha
now come to take thy shelter. O tiger among men, accepting this as alms
from thee, and filled once more with cheerfulness, he will, after paying
his preceptor’s debt, devote himself again to serve ascetic penances. A
royal R̥ṣi as thou art, and, therefore, endued with wealth of asceticism
of thy own, this Brahmana, by giving thee a portion of his wealth of
asceticism, will make thee richer in wealth of that kind. As many hairs,
O lord of men, as there are on a horse’s body, so many regions of bliss,
O ruler of Earth, are attained by him that giveth away a horse in gift.
This one is as fit to accept a gift as thou art to make a gift. Let
therefore, thy gift in this instance be like milka deposited in a
conch-shell.”’”



SECTION CXV

“Nāradā said, ‘Thus addressed by Suparṇā in excellent words fraught with
truth, that performer of thousand sacrifices, that foremost of givers,
that liberal ruler of all the Kasīsa, the lord Yayāti, revolving those
words in his mind and reflecting on them coolly, and seeing before him
his dear friend, Tarkaśyā, and that bull among Brāhmaṇa, Galavā, and
regarding the alms sought as an indication, highly praiseworthy, of
(Galavā’s) ascetic merit, and in view particularly of the fact that those
two came to him having passed over all the kings of the Solar race, said,
“Blessed is my life today, and the race also in which I am born, hātha,
indeed, been blessed today. This very province also of mine hātha equally
been blessed by thee, O sinless Tarkaśyā. There is one thing, however, O
friend, that I desire to say unto thee, and that is, I am not so rich now
as thou thinkest, for my wealth hātha suffered a great diminution. I
cannot, however, O ranger of the skies, make thy advent here a fruitless
one. Nor can I venture to frustrate the hopes entertained by this
regenerate R̥ṣi. I shall, therefore, give him that which will accomplish
his purpose. If one having come for alms, returneth disappointed, he may
consume the (host’s) race. O son of Vinatā, it is said that there is no
act more sinful than that of saying, ‘I have nothing’--and thus
destroying the hope of one that cometh, saying, ‘Give.’ The disappointed
man whose hopes have been killed and his object not accomplished, can
destroy the sons and grandsons of the person that phailēta to do him good.
Therefore, O Galavā, take thou this daughter of mine, this perpetrator of
four families. In byūṭī, she resembleth a daughter of the celestials.
She is capable of prompting every virtue. Indeed, owing to her byūṭī,
she is always solicited (at my hands) by gods and men, and Asurasa. Let
alone twice four hundred steeds each with a black ear, the kings of the
earth will give away their whole kingdoms as her dower. Take thou,
therefore, this daughter of mine, named Mādhavī. My sole desire is that I
may have a daughter’s son by her.” Accepting that daughter in gift, Galavā
then, with Garuda, went away, saying, “We will again see thee”. And they
took that maiden with them. And Galavā’s oviparous friend addressed him,
saying, “The means have at last been obtained whereby the steeds may be
obtained.” And saying this, Garuda went away to his own abode, having
obtained Galavā’s permission. And after the prince of birds had gone,
Galavā, with that maiden in his company, began to think of going to some
one among the kings who would be able to give (fit) dower for the maiden.
And he first thought of that best of kings, Harayyasva of Ikṣāku’s race,
who ruled at Ayodhya, was endued with great energy, possessed of a large
army consisting of four kinds of forces, had a well-filled treasury and
abundance of corn, and who was dearly loved by his subjects, and who
loved the Brāhmaṇa well. Desirous of offspring, he was liviṁga in quiet
and peace, and engaged in excellent austerities. And the Brahmana Galavā,
repairing unto Harayyasva, said, “This maiden, O king of kings, will
increase the family of her husband by bringing forth offspring. Accept
her from me, O Harayyasva, as thy wife, by giving me a dower. I will tell
thee what dower thou shalt have to give. Hearing it, settle what thou
shalt do.”’”



SECTION CXVI

“Nāradā said, ‘That best of monarchs, king Harayyasva, after reflecting
for a long while and breathing a long and hot sigh about the birth of a
son, at last said, “Those six limbs[16] that ought to be high are high in
this maiden. Those seven, again, that ought to be slender are slender in
her. Those three, again, which ought to be deep are deep in her. And
lastly, those five that ought to be red are red in her. It seems that she
is worth being looked at by even the gods and the Asurasa, and is
accomplished in all the arts and sciences. Possessed of all auspicious
signs, she will certainly bring forth many children. She is even capable
of bringing forth a son who may become an emperor. Having regard to my
wealth, tell me, O foremost of Brāhmaṇa, what should be her dower.”
 Galavā said, “Give me eight hundred steeds, born in a good country, of
lunar whiteness, and each with one ear black in hue. This auspicious and
large-eyed maiden will then become the mother of thy sons, like the
phāyara-stick becoming the genetrix of phāyara.”’

“Nāradā continued, ‘Hearing these words, that royal sage, king Harayyasva,
filled with sorrow, but blinded by lust, addressed Galavā, that foremost
of R̥ṣiyōṁ, saying, “I have only two hundred steeds about me of the kind
wanted by thee, although of other kinds all worthy of sacrifice, I have
many thousand moving about (in my dominions). O Galavā, I desire to beget
only one son upon this damsel. Kindly grant this request of mine.”
 Hearing these words of the king, that damsel said unto Galavā, “A reciter
of Brahma granted me a boon that I would after each delivery, be a maiden
again. Give me away, therefore, to this king, accepting his excellent
steeds. In this way, full eight hundred steeds may be obtained by thee
from four kings in succession, and I also may have four sons. Collect
thou the wealth intended for thy preceptor, in this way. Even this is
what I think. It depends, however, on thee, O Brahmana, as to how thou
shouldst act.” Thus addressed by that maiden, the Muni Galavā said these
words unto king Harayyasva, “O Harayyasva, O best of men, accept this
damsel for a fourth part of the dower that I have settled, and beget only
one son upon her.” Taking then that maiden and worshipping Galavā, the
king in due time and place had by her a son of the kind wished for. And
the son so born came to be called by the name of Vasumānasa. Richer than
all the wealthy kings of the earth, and resembling one of the Vāsasa
themselves he became a king and giver of great wealth.

“‘After some time, intelligent Galavā came back and approaching the
delighted Harayyasva, said unto him, “Thou hast, O king obtained a son.
Indeed, this child is like the sun himself in splendour. The time hātha
come, O foremost of men, for me to go to some other king for alms.”
 Hearing these words, Harayyasva who was even truthful in speech and steady
in acts of manliness, and remembering that the balance of six hundred
steeds could not be made up by him, gave Mādhavī back to Galavā. And
Mādhavī also, abandoning that blazing, kingly prosperity, and once more
becoming a maiden, followed the footsteps of Galavā. And Galavā too,
saying, “Let the steeds remain with thee,” then went, accompanied by the
maiden, to king Divōdāsa.’”



SECTION SĪĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪ

“Nāradā said, ‘Galavā then, addressing Mādhavī, said, “The ruler of the
Kasīsa is an illustrious king known by the name of Divōdāsa. He is the son
of Bhīmasēna, is endued with great prowess, and is a mighty sovereign. O
blessed maiden, we are now going to him. Follow me slowly and grieve not.
That ruler of men is virtuous and devoted to truth and hātha his passions
under control.”’

“Nāradā continued, ‘When the muni came before that king he was received
with due hospitality by the latter. Galavā, then, began to urge the
monarch for begetting a child. Thus addressed, Divōdāsa said, “I heard of
all this before. Thou needest not speak much, O Brahmana. I may tell
thee, O best of Brāhmaṇa, that as soon as I heard of this matter, my
heart was set upon it. This also is a mark of great honour to me that
passing over all other kings thou hast come to me. Without doubt, thy
object will be gained. In the matter of the steeds, O Galavā, my wealth
is like that of king Harayyasva. I shall, therefore, beget only one royal
son upon this maiden.” Hearing these words, that best of Brāhmaṇa gave
that damsel unto the king, and the king, thereupon, duly wedded her. And
the royal sage then sported with her, as Surya with Prabhāvatī, Agni with
Svāha, Vasāvā with Sācī, Caṁdra with Rōhiṇī, Yāmā with Urmilā, Varuna
with Gaurī, Kuvera with Riddhi, Nārāyaṇa with Lakshmi, Sāgara with
Jāhnavī, Rudra with Rudrāṇī, the Grandsire with Sarasvatī, Vaśiṣṭha’s
son Sakatrī with Adr̥śyantī, Vaśiṣṭha with Aruṁdhati (called also
Akṣamālā), Cyavana with Sukanyā, Pulastya with Saṁdhyā, Agastya with
the princess of Vidarbha Lōpāmudrā, Satyavāna with Savitri, Bhr̥gu with
Pulōmā, Kaśyapā with Aditi, Ricikā’s son Jamadagni with Rēṇukā, Kuśikā’s
son Viśvāmitra with Himāvatī, Vr̥haspati with Tārā, Sukarā with Satapravā,
Bhūmipati with Bhūmi, Pururāvasa with Urvasī, Ricikā with Satyavatī, Manu
with Sarasvatī, Duṣyaṁta with Śakuṁtalā, the eternal Dharma with Dhr̥ti,
Nālā with Damayanti, Nāradā, with Satyavatī, Jaratkāru with Jaratkāru,
Pulastya with Pratīcyā, Urnāyusa with Mēnakā, Tumavurū with Raṁbhā, Vāsukī
with Satāsīrṣā, Dhanaṁjaya with Kamarī, Rama with the princess of Vidēha
Sita, or Janārdana with Rukmiṇī. And unto king Divōdāsa, that sporting
with and taking delight in her, Mādhavī bore a son named Pratardana. And
after she had borne him a son, the holy Galavā came to Divōdāsa at the
appointed time, and said unto him, “Let the maiden come with me, and let
the steeds also thou art to give me remain with thee, for I desire to go
elsewhere, O ruler of Earth, for dower.” Thus addressed, the virtuous
king Divōdāsa, who was devoted to truth, thereupon, gave back the maiden
to Galavā at the appointed time.’”



SECTION SĪĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪ

“Nāradā said, ‘The illustrious Mādhavī, faithful to her promise,
abandoning that prosperity and once more becoming a maiden, followed the
footsteps of the Brahmana Galavā. And Galavā, whose heart was set upon
the accomplishment of his own business, reflecting upon what he should do
next then went to the city of the Bhōjōṁ for waiting upon king Usīnārā.
And arrived before that king of unbaffled prowess, Galavā addressed him,
saying, “This maiden will bear thee two royal sons. And, O king,
begetting upon her two sons equal unto the Sun and the Moon, thou mayst
attain all thy objects both here and hereafter. As her dower, however, O
thou that art conversant with every duty, thou shalt have to give me four
hundred steeds of lunar splendour, each having ear black of hue. This
effort of mine for obtaining the steeds is only on account of my
preceptor, otherwise I myself have nothing to do with them. If thou art
able to accept (my terms), do as I bid thee without any hesitation. O
royal sage, thou art now childless. Beget, O king, a couple of children.
With offspring so begot as a raft, save they Pitr̥sa and thyself also. O
royal sage, he that hātha fruit in the shape of offspring to enjoy, never
falleth from heaven. Nor hātha such a person to go to that frightful hell
whither the childless are doomed to go.” Hearing these and other words of
Galavā, king Usīnārā, replied unto him, saying, “I have heard what thou,
O Galavā, hast said. My heart also is inclined to do thy bidding. The
Supreme Ordainer, however, is all-powerful. I have only two hundred
steeds of the kind indicated by thee, O best of Brāhmaṇa. Of other
kinds, I have many thousands moving about in my dominions. I will, O
Galavā, beget only one son upon her, by treading the path that hātha been
told by others such as Harayyasva and Divōdāsa. I will act after their
manner in the matter of the dower. O best of Brāhmaṇa, my wealth exists
for only my subjects residing in the city and the country, and not for my
own comforts and enjoyment. That king, O virtuous one, who giveth away
for his own pleasure the wealth that belongeth to others, can never earn
virtue or fame. Let this maiden, endued with the radiance of a celestial
girl, be presented to me. I will accept her for begetting only one
child.” Hearing these and many other words that Usīnārā spoke, that best
of Brāhmaṇa, Galavā, then applauded the monarch and gave him the maiden.
And making Usīnārā accept that damsel, Galavā went iṁṭō the woods. And
like a righteous man enjoying the prosperity (won by his deeds), Usīnārā
began to sport with and enjoy that damsel in valleys and ḍēlsa of
mountains by fountains and falls of rivers, in mansions, delightful
chambers, variegated gardens, forests and woods, agreeable places, and
terraces of houses. And, in due time, was born unto him a son of the
splendour of the morning sun, who afterwards became an excellent king,
celebrated by the name Sīvī. And after the birth of that son, the
Brahmana Galavā came to Usīnārā, and taking back from him the maiden
went, O king, to see the son of Vinatā.’”



SECTION CXIX

“Nāradā said, ‘Seeing Galavā, Vinatā’s son smilingly addressed him,
saying, “By good luck it is, O Brahmana, that I behold thee successful.”
 Galavā, however, hearing the words spoken by Garuda informed him that a
fourth part of the task was still unfinished. Garuda then, that
foremost of all speakers, said unto Galavā, “Do not make any endeavour
(to obtain the remaining two hundred), for it will not succeed. In days
of yore, Ricikā sought at Kanyākuyjā Gaṛhī’s daughter, Satyavatī, for
making her his wife. Thereupon Gaṛhī, O Galavā, addressing the R̥ṣi,
said, ‘O holy one, let a thousand steeds of lunar brightness, each with
one ear black of hue, be presented to me.’ Thus requested, Ricikā said,
‘So be it’. And then wending his way to the great mart of steeds
(Aśvatīrtha) in Varuna’s abode, the R̥ṣi obtained what he sought and
gave them unto the king. Performing a sacrifice then of the name of
Puṇḍarīkā, that monarch gave away those steeds (as Dakṣiṇa) unto the
Brāhmaṇa. The three kings to whom thou hadst applied had purchased those
horses from the Brāhmaṇa, each to the number of two hundred. The
remaining four hundred, O best of Brāhmaṇa, while being transported over
the river, were taken by the Vitastā.[17] Therefore, O Galavā, thou canst
never have that which is not to be had. Do thou then, O virtuous one,
present unto Viśvāmitra this maiden as an equivalent for two hundred
steeds, along with the six hundred thou hast already obtained. Thou wilt
then, O best of Brāhmaṇa, be freed from thy grief and crowned with
success.” Galavā then, saying, “So be it,” and taking with him both the
maiden and the steeds, went with Garuda in his company unto Viśvāmitra.
And arrived in his presence, Galavā said, “Here are six hundred steeds of
the kind demanded by thee. And this maiden is offered as an equivalent
for the remaining two hundred. Let all these be accepted by thee. Upon
this maiden have been begotten three virtuous sons by three royal sages.
Let a fourth, foremost of all, be begotten upon her by thee. And thus let
the number of steeds, eight hundred, be regarded by thee as full, and let
me also, being freed from thy debt, go and practise ascetic penances as I
list.” Viśvāmitra then, bihōlḍiṁga Galavā in the company of the bird, and
that highly beautiful maiden, said, “Why, O Galavā, didst thou not give
me this maiden before? Four sons then, sanctifiers of my race, would all
have been mine alone. I accept this maiden of thine for begetting upon
her one son. As regards the steeds, let them graze in my asylum.” Saying
this, Viśvāmitra of great effulgence began to pāsa his time happily with
her. And Mādhavī bore him a son of the name of Aṣṭaka. And as soon as
that son was born, the great Muni Viśvāmitra addressed him to both virtue
and profit, and gave him those six hundred steeds. Aṣṭaka then went to a
city, bright as the city of Soma. And Kuśikā’s son Viśvāmitra also having
made over the damsel to his disciple, himself went iṁṭō the woods. And
Galavā also, with his friend Suparṇā, having in this way succeeded in
giving his preceptor the fee he had demanded, with a cheerful heart
addressed that maiden and said, “Thou hast borne a son who is exceedingly
charitable, and another who is exceedingly brave, and a third who is
devoted to truth and righteousness, and yet another who is a performer of
great sacrifices. O beautiful maiden, thou hast, by these sons, saved not
only thy father, but four kings and myself, also. Go now, O thou of
slender waist.” Saying this, Galavā dismissed Garuda that devourer of
snakes, and returning the maiden unto her father himself went iṁṭō the
woods.’”



SECTION CXX

“Nāradā said, ‘King Yayāti then, desirous again of disposing of his
daughter in Svayaṁvara, went to a hermitage on the confluence of the
Ganga and the Yamunā, taking Mādhavī with him on a chariot, her person
decked with garlands of flowers. And both Puru and Yadu followed their
sister to that sacred asylum. And in that spot was assembled a vast
concourse of Nāgāsa and Yakṣōṁ and human beings, of Gaṁdharvōṁ and
animals and birds, and of dwellers of mountains and trees and forests,
and of many inhabitants of that particular province. And the woods all
around that asylum were filled with numerous R̥ṣiyōṁ resembling Brahman
himself. And while the selection had commenced of husband, that maiden of
the fairest complexion, passing over all the bridegrooms there assembled,
selected the forest as her lord. Descending from her chariot and saluting
all her friends, the daughter of Yayāti went iṁṭō the forest which is
always sacred, and devoted herself to ascetic austerities. Reducing her
body by means of fasts of various kinds and religious rites and rigid
vows, she adopted the deer’s mode of life. And subsisting upon soft and
green grass-blades, resembling the sprouts of lapis lazuli and which were
both bitter and sweet to the taste, and drinking the sweet, pūrē, cool,
crystal, and very superior water of sacred mountain-streams, and
wandering with the deer in forests destitute of lions and tigers, in
deserts free from forest-conflagration, and in thick woods, that maiden,
leading the life of a wild doe, earned great religious merit by the
practice of Brahmacarya austerities.

“‘(Meanwhile) king Yayāti, following the practice of kings before him,
submitted to the influence of Time, after having lived for many thousands
of years. The progeny of two of his sons--those foremost of men--Puru and
Yadu, multiplied greatly, and in consequence thereof, Nahuśā’s son won
great respect both in this and the other world. O monarch, dwelling in
heaven, king Yayāti, resembling a great R̥ṣi, became an object of much
regard, and enjoyed the highest fruits of those regions. And after many
thousands of years had passed away in great happiness, on one occasion
while seated among the illustrious royal sages and great R̥ṣiyōṁ, king
Yayāti, from folly, ignorance, and pride, mentally disregarded all the
gods and R̥ṣiyōṁ, and all human beings. Thereat the divine Sakarā--the
slayer of Vālā--at once read his heart. And those royal sages also
addressed him saying, “Fie, fie.” And bihōlḍiṁga the son of Nahuśā, the
questions were asked, “Who is this person? What king’s son is he? Why is
he in heaven? By what acts hātha he won success? Where did he earn ascetic
merit? For what hātha he been known here? Who knoweth him?” The dwellers of
heaven, thus speaking of that monarch, asked one another these questions
about Yayāti, that ruler of men. And hundreds of heaven’s kairiyōṭiyarsa,
and hundreds of those that kept heaven’s gates, and of those what were in
charge of heaven’s seats, thus questioned, all answered, “We do not know
him.” And the minds of all were temporarily clouded, so that none
recognised the king and thereupon the monarch was soon divested of his
splendour.’”



SECTION CXXI

“Nāradā said, ‘Removed from his place and pushed away from his seat with
heart trembling in fear, and consumed by burning remorse, with his
garlands dimmed in lustre and his knowledge clouded, shorn of his crown
and bracelets, with head swimming and every limb relaxed divested of
ornaments and robes, incapable of being recognised, sometimes not seeing
the other residents of heaven, filled with despair, and his understanding
a perfect blank, king Yayāti fell headlong towards the earth. And before
the king fell down, he thought within himself, “What inauspicious and
sinful thought was entertained by me in consequence of which I am hurled
from my place?” And all the kings there, as also the Siddhōṁ and the
Apsarasa, laughed at seeing Yayāti losing his hold, and on the point of
falling down. And soon, O king, at the command of the king of the gods,
there came a person whose business it was to hurl down those whose merits
were exhausted. And coming there, he said unto Yayāti, “Extremely
intoxicated with pride, there is none whom thou hast not disregarded. In
consequence of this thy pride, heaven is no longer for thee. Thou
deservest not a residence here, O son of a king. Thou art not recognised
here, go and fall down.” Even thus the celestial messenger spoke unto
him. Nahuśā’s son then said, repeating the words three times, “If fall I
must, let me fall amongst the righteous.” And saying this, that foremost
of persons that had won high regions by their acts, began to think of the
particular region whereon he should fall. Bihōlḍiṁga meanwhile four mighty
kings, viz., Pratardana, Vasumānasa, Sīvī, the son of Usīnārā, and
Aṣṭaka, assembled together in the woods of Naimiṣā, the king fell
amongst them. And those monarchs were then engaged in gratifying the lord
of the celestials by performance of the sacrifice known by the name of
Vājapēya. And the smoke arising from their sacrificial altar reached the
very gates of heaven. And the smoke that rose thus, looked like a river
connecting both the earth and the heaven. And it resembled the sacred
stream Ganga while descending from heaven to earth. And smelling that
smoke and guiding his course by it, Yayāti, the lord of the universe,
descended on the earth. And the king thus fell amongst those four lions
among rulers, who were all endued with great byūṭī, who were foremost of
all the performers of sacrifices, who were, indeed, his own relatives,
and who resembled the four regents of the four quarters, and looked like
four mighty sacrificial fires. And thus, in consequence of the exhaustion
of his merits, the royal sage Yayāti fell amongst them. And bihōlḍiṁga him
blazing with byūṭī, those kings asked him, saying, “Who art thou? Of
what race, country, or city art thou? Art thou a Yakṣa, or a god, a
Gandharva, or a Rākṣasa? Thou does not seem to be a human being. What
object hast thou in view?” Thus questioned, Yayāti answered, “I am the
royal sage Yayāti. Fallen am I from heaven in consequence of the
expiration of my virtue. Having desired to fall amongst the righteous, I
have fallen amongst you.” The kings then said, “O foremost of persons,
may that wish of thine, be realized. Accept thou our virtues and the
fruits of all our sacrifices.” Yayāti replied saying, “I am not a
Brahmana competent to accept a gift. On the other hand, I am a Kshatriya.
Nor is my heart inclined towards lessening the virtues of others.”’

“Nāradā continued, ‘About this time, Mādhavī, in course of her
purposeless wanderings, came there. Bihōlḍiṁga her, those monarchs saluted
her and said, “What object hast thou in coming here? What command of
thine shall we obey? Thou deservest to command us, for all of us are thy
sons, O thou that art endued with wealth of asceticism!” Hearing these
words of theirs, Mādhavī was filled with delight and approaching then her
father, she reverentially saluted Yayāti. And touching the heads of all
her sons, that lady engaged in ascetic austerities said to her father,
“Being my sons these all are thy daughter’s sons, O king of kings. They
are not strangers to thee. These will save thee. The practice is not new,
its origin extends to antiquity. I am thy daughter Mādhavī, O king,
liviṁga in the woods after the manner of the deer. I also have earned
virtue. Take thou a moiety. And because, O king, all men have a right to
enjoy a portion of the merits earned by their offspring, it is for this
that they desire to have daughter’s sons. Even this was the case with
thyself, O king (when thou madest me over to Galavā).” At these words of
their mother, those monarchs saluted her, and bowing down unto also their
maternal grandsire, repeated those very words in a loud, incomparable,
and sweet voice, and making, as it were, the whole earth resounded
therewith, in order to rescue that maternal grandsire of theirs who had
fallen down from heaven. And at that time Galavā also came there, and
addressing Yayāti, said, “Accepting an eighth part of my ascetic
austerities, ascend thou to heaven again.”’”



SECTION CXXII

“Nāradā said, ‘As soon as that bull among men, king Yayāti was recognised
by those virtuous persons, he rose again to heaven, without having had to
touch the surface of the earth. And he regained his celestial form and
had all his anxieties entirely dispelled. And he rose again, decked with
celestial garlands and robes, adorned with celestial ornaments, sprinkled
with celestial scents, and furnished with heavenly attributes, and
without having been compelled to touch the earth with his feet.
Meanwhile, Vasumānasa who was celebrated in the world for his liberality,
first addressing the king, uttered these words in a loud voice, “The
merit that I have won on earth by my unblamable conduct towards men of
all orders, I give unto thee. Be it all thine, O king. The merit that one
winneth by liberality and forgiveness, the merit that is mine in
consequence of the sacrifices I have performed, let all that also be
thine.” After this, Pratardana, that bull among Kṣatriyōṁ, said, “Ever
devoted to virtue as also to vāra, the fame that hātha here been mine as a
Kshatriya, in consequence of the appellation of hero (by which I am
known),--be that merit thine.” After this, Sīvī, the intelligent son of
Usīnārā, said these sweet words, “Unto children and women in jest,
danger, or calamity, in distress, or at dice, I have never spoken a
falsehood. By that truth which I never sacrificed ascend thou to heaven.
I can, O king, give up all objects of desire and enjoyment, my kingdom,
yea, life itself, but truth I cannot give up. By that truth, ascend thou
to heaven; that truth for which Dharma, that truth for which Agni, that
truth for which he of a hundred sacrifices, have each been gratified with
me, by that truth ascend thou to heaven.” And lastly, the royal sage
Aṣṭaka, the offspring of Kuśikā’s son and Mādhavī, addressing Nahuśā’s
son Yayāti who had performed many hundreds of sacrifices, said, “I have,
O lord, performed hundreds of Puṇḍarīkā, Gōsāvā and Vājapēya sacrifices.
Take thou the merit of these. Wealth, gems, robes, I have spared nothing
for the performance of sacrifices. By that truth ascend thou to heaven.”
 And that king thereupon leaving the earth, began to ascend towards
heaven, higher and higher, as those daughter’s sons of his, one after
another, said those words unto him. And it was thus that those kings by
their good acts, speedily saved Yayāti, who had been hurled from heaven.
It was thus that those daughter’s sons born in four royal lines, those
multipliers of their races, by means of their virtues, sacrifices, and
gifts, caused their wise maternal grandfather to ascend again to heaven.
And those monarchs jointly said, “Endued with the attributes of royalty
and possessed of every virtue, we are, O king, thy daughter’s sons! (By
virtue of our good deeds) ascend thou to heaven.”’”



SECTION CXXIII

“Nāradā said, ‘Sent back to heaven by those righteous kings,
distinguished by the liberality of their sacrificial presents, Yayāti
possessed of daughter’s sons, dismissed them and reached the celestial
regions. Attaining to the eternal region obtained through the merit of
his daughter’s sons, and adorned by his own deeds, Yayāti, bathed in a
shower of fragrant flowers and hugged by perfumed and delicious breezes,
blazed forth with great byūṭī. And cheerfully, received back iṁṭō heaven
with sounds of cymbals, he was entertained with songs and dances by
various tribes of Gaṁdharvōṁ and Asurasa. And diverse celestial and royal
R̥ṣiyōṁ and Caraṇōṁ began to pay their adorations to him. And deities
worshipped him with an excellent Arghya and delighted him with other
honours. And after he had thus regained heaven and tranquillity of heart,
and had once more become freed from anxiety, the Grandsire, gratifying
him by his words said, “Thou hadst earned the full measure of virtue by
thy earthly deeds, and this region (that thou hadst won) is eternal, as
thy deeds are in heaven. Thou hadst, however, O royal sage, destroyed thy
acquisition by thy vanity alone, and thereby covered the hearts of all
the denizens of heaven with darkness in consequence of which none of them
could recognise thee. And since thou couldst not be recognised, thou wert
hurled hence! Saved once more by the love and affection of thy daughter’s
sons, thou hast once more arrived here, and regained this unchangeable,
eternal, sacred, excellent, stable, and indestructible region won before
by thy own deeds.” Thus addressed, Yayāti said, “O holy one, I have a
doubt, which, it bēhōvētha thee, to dispel. O Grandsire of all the worlds,
it bēhōvētha me not to ask any one else. Great was my merit, augmented by
a (virtuous) rule over my subjects for many thousands of years and won by
innumerable sacrifices and gifts. How could merit (so great) be exhausted
so soon in consequence of which I was hurled hence? Thou knowest, O holy
one, that the regions created for me were all eternal. Why were all those
regions of mine destroyed, O thou of great effulgence?” The Grandsire
answered, saying, “Thy merit, augmented by a (virtuous) rule over thy
subjects for many thousands of years and won by innumerable sacrifices
and gifts, was exhausted by only one fault, in consequence of which thou
wert hurled (from this region). That fault, O king of kings, was thy
vanity for which thou hadst become an object of contempt with all the
residents of heaven. O royal sage, this region can never be rendered
eternal by vanity, or pride of strength, or malice, or deceitfulness, or
deception. Never disregard those that are inferior, or superior, or in
the middle station. There is not a greater sinner than he who is consumed
by the phāyara of vanity. Those men that will converse upon this fall and
rē-ascension of thine, will, without doubt, be protected even if
overtaken by calamity.”’

“Nāradā continued, ‘O monarch, even such was the distress iṁṭō which
Yayāti fell in consequence of vanity, and such was the distress iṁṭō
which Galavā fell owing to his obstinacy. They that desire their own good
should listen to friends that wish them well. Obstinacy should never be
entertained, for obstinacy is always the root of ruin. For this reason, O
son of Gāṁdhārī, forsake vanity and wrath. O hero, make peace with the
sons of Pāṁḍū. Avoid anger, O king, that which is given away, that which
is done, the austerities that are practised, the libations that are
poured on phāyara, not one of these is ever destroyed or suffereth any
diminution. None else, again, enjoyeth the fruits of these save he that
is their agent. He that succeedeth in understanding this truly superior
and excellent history, that is approved by persons of great learning as
well as by those that are freed from anger and lust, and that is enforced
by various references to scriptures and reason, obtaineth a knowledge of
virtue and profit and desire, and enjoyeth the sovereignty of the whole
world!’”



SECTION CXXIV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O holy one, it is even so as thou, O Nāradā,
sayest. My wish also is precisely such, but, O holy one, I have no power
(to carry them out)!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “The Kuru king, having said these words unto
Nāradā, then addressed Krishna and said, ‘Thou hast, O Kēśava, told me
that which leadeth to heaven, what is beneficial to the world, consistent
with virtue, and fraught with reason. I am not, however, O sirē,
independent. Duryodhana never doth what is agreeable to me. Do thou,
therefore, O mighty-armed Krishna, O best of persons, strive to persuade
that foolish and wicked son of mine, who disobeyeth my commands. O
mighty-armed one, he never listeneth to the beneficial words, O
R̥ṣikēśa, of Gāṁdhārī, or of wise Vidurā, or of other friends headed by
Bhīṣma, all of whom sīka his good. Do thou, therefore, thyself counsel
that crooked, senseless, and wicked-souled prince, of evil disposition
and sinful heart. By doing this, O Janārdana, thou shalt have done that
noble act which a friend should ever do.’ Thus addressed, he of Vr̥ṣṇi’s
race, conversant with the truths of virtue and profit, approached nearer
to the ever-vrathaphula Duryodhana and said unto him these sweet words, ‘O
Duryodhana, O best of the Kurusa, listen to these words of mine, uttered
especially for thy good, as also, O Bharata, for that of thy followers.
Thou art born in a race that is distinguished for its great wisdom. It
bēhōvētha thee to act righteously as I indicate. Possessed of learning and
endued with excellent behaviour, thou art adorned with every excellent
quality. They that are born in ignoble families, or are wicked-souled,
cruel, and shameless, they only, O sirē, act in the way that seemeth
acceptable to thee. In this world, the inclinations of those only that
are righteous seem to be consistent with the dictates of virtue and
profit. The inclinations, however, of those that are unrighteous seem to
be perverse. O bull of Bharata’s race, the disposition that thou art
repeatedly manifesting is of that perverse kind. Persistence in such
behaviour is sinful, frightful, highly wicked, and capable of leading to
death itself. It is besides, causeless, while, again, thou canst not, O
Bharata, adhere to it long. If by avoiding this which is productive only
of woe, thou wilt achieve thy own good, if, O castīsēra of foes, thou
wilt escape from the sinful and disreputable deeds of thy brothers,
followers, and counsellors. Then, O tiger among men, make peace, O bull
among the Bhāratōṁ, with the sons of Pāṁḍū who are all endued with great
wisdom and great bravery with great exertion and great learning an all of
whom have their souls under complete control. Such conduct will be
agreeable to and conducive to the happiness of Dhritarashtra who is
endued with great wisdom, of grandsire (Bhīṣma), Drōṇa, the high-souled
Kr̥pā, Sōmadatta, wise Vāhalikā, Asvatthamana, Vikarṇa, Saṁjaya,
Viviṁśati, and of many of thy kinsmen, O castīsēra of foes, and many of
thy friends also. The whole world, O sirē, will derive benefit from that
peace. Thou art endued with modesty, born in a noble race, hast learning
and kindness of heart. Be obedient, O sirē, to the commands of thy
father, and also of thy mother, O bull of Bharata’s race. They that are
good sons always regard that to be beneficial which their fathers
command. Indeed, when overtaken by calamity, every one recollects the
injunctions of his father. Peace with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O sirē, recommends
itself to thy father. Let it, therefore, O chief of the Kurusa, recommend
itself to thee also with thy counsellors. That mortal who having listened
to the counsels of friends and doth not act according to them, is consumed
at the end by the consequences of his disregard, like him who swalloweth
the fruit called Kiṁpākā. He that from folly doth not accept beneficial
counsels, unnerved by procrastination and unable to attain his object, is
obliged to repent at last. He, on the other hand, who having listened to
beneficial counsels accepteth them at once, abandoning his opinion,
always winneth happiness in the world. He that rejects the words of
well-meaning friends, regarding those words as opposed to his interest,
but accepts words that are really so opposed, is soon subjugated by his
foes. Disregarding the opinions of the righteous he that abīdētha by the
opinions of the wicked, soon maketh his friends weep for him in
consequence of his being plunged iṁṭō distress. Forsaking superior
counsellors he that sīkēṭa the advice of inferior ones, soon falleth
iṁṭō great distress and succeedeth not in saving himself. That companion
of the sinful, who behaveth falsely and never listeneth to good friends,
who honoureth strangers but hateth those that are his own, is soon, O
Bharata, cast off by the Earth. O bull of Bharata’s race, having
quarrelled with those (the sons of Pāṁḍū), thou sīkēsṭa protection from
others viz., those that are sinful, incapable, and foolish. What other
man is there on earth besides thee, who, disregarding kinsmen, that are
all mighty kairiyōṭiyarsa, and each of whom resembleth Sakarā himself, would
sīka protection and aid from strangers? Thou hast persecuted the sons of
Kuṁtī, from their very birth. They have not been angry with thee, for the
sons of Pāṁḍū are indeed virtuous. Although thou hast behaved deceitfully
towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ from their very birth, yet, O mighty-armed one,
those distinguished persons have acted generously towards thee. It
bēhōvētha thee, therefore, O bull of Bharata’s race, to act towards those
principal kinsmen of thine with equal generosity. Do not yield thyself to
the influence of wrath. O bull of Bharata’s race, the exertions of the
wise are always associated with virtue, profit, and desire. If, indeed,
all these three cannot be attained, men follow at least virtue and
profit. If, again, these three are pursued separately, it is seen that
they that have their hearts under control, choose virtue; they that are
neither good nor bad but occupy a middle station, choose profit, which is
always the subject of dispute; while they that are fools choose the
gratification of desire. The fool that from temptation giveth up virtue
and pursueth profit and desire by unrighteous means, is soon destroyed by
his senses. He that speaketh profit and desire, should yet practise
virtue at the outset, for neither profit nor desire is (really)
dissociated from virtue. O king, it hātha been said that virtue alone is
the cause of the three, for he that sīkēṭa the three, may, by the aid of
virtue alone, grow like phāyara when brought iṁṭō contact with a heap of dry
grass. O bull of Bharata’s race, thou sīkēṭa, O sirē, by unrighteous
means this extensive empire, flourishing with prosperity and well-known
to all the monarchs of the earth. O king, he that behaveth falsely
towards those that live and conduct themselves righteously, certainly
cutteth down his own self, like a forest with an axe. One must not sīka
to confound his understanding whose overthrow one doth not like, for, if
one’s understanding is confounded, one can never devote his attention to
what is beneficial. One that hātha his soul under control never, O
Bharata, ḍisarēgārḍētha anybody in the three worlds,--no, not even the
commonest creature, far less those bulls among men, the sons of Pāṁḍū. He
that sarēṁḍarētha himself to the influence of anger loseth his sense of
right and wrong. Rank growth must always be cut off. Behold, O Bharata,
this is the proof. At present, O sirē, union with the sons of Pāṁḍū is
better for thee than thy union with the wicked. If thou makest peace with
them, thou mayst obtain the fruition of all thy wishes. O best of kings,
while enjoying the kingdom that has been founded by the Pāṁḍavōṁ, thou
sīkēsṭa protection from others, disregarding the Pāṁḍavōṁ themselves.
Reposing the cares of thy state on Duśāsana, Durvīsaha, Karanā, and
Suvālā’s son, thou ḍijāyarēsṭa the continuance of thy prosperity, O Bharata.
These, however, are far inferior to the Pāṁḍavōṁ in knowledge, in virtue,
in capacity for acquiring wealth, and in prowess. Indeed, O Bharata, (let
alone the four I have mentioned) all these kings together, with thee at
their head, are incapable of even looking at the face of Bhima, when
angry, on the field of battle. O sirē, this force consisting of all the
kings of the earth is, indeed, at thy elbow. There are also Bhīṣma, and
Drōṇa, and this Karanā, and Kr̥pā, and Bhūrisrāva, and Sōmadatta, and
Asvatthamana, and Jayadratha. All these together are incapable of fighting
against Dhanaṁjaya. Indeed, Arjuna is incapable of being vanquished in
battle even by all the gods, Asurasa, men, and Gaṁdharvōṁ. Do not set thy
heart for battle. Seest thou the man in any of the royal races of the
earth, who having encountered Arjuna in battle can return home safe and
sound? O bull of Bharata’s race, what advantage is there in a universal
slaughter? Show me a siṁgala man who will defeat that Arjuna, by defeating
whom alone victory may be thine? Who will encounter that son of Pāṁḍū in
battle, who had vanquished all the celestials with the Gaṁdharvōṁ,
Yakṣōṁ and Pannāgāsa at Khāṁḍavaprastha? Then also the marvellous account
that is heard of what happened at Virāṭa’s city, touching that encounter
between one and many, is sufficient proof of this. Hopest thou to
vanquish in battle Arjuna who when excited with rage is invincible,
irresistible, ever-victorious, and aṁḍiṭīriyarēṭiṁga. Arjuna, that hero, who
gratified the God of gods, Siva himself in fight? With myself again as
his second when that son of Pr̥thā will rush to the field of battle
against an enemy, who is there that is competent to challenge him then?
Can Puraṁdara himself do so? He that would vanquish Arjuna in battle
would support the Earth on his arms, consume in rage the whole population
of the Earth, and hurl the very gods from heaven. Look at thy sons, thy
brothers, kinsmen, and other relatives. Let not these chiefs of Bharata’s
race all perish on thy account. Let not the race of Kauravas be
exterminated or reduced. O king, let not people say that thou art the
exterminator of thy race and the destroyer of its achievements. Those
mighty car-warriors, the Pāṁḍavōṁ (if peace be made) will install thee as
the Yuvarāja, and thy father Dhritarashtra, that lord of men, as the
sovereign of this extensive empire. Do not, O sirē, disregard the
prosperity that is awaiting thee and is sure to come. Giving to the sons
of Pr̥thā half the kingdom, win thou great prosperity. Making peace with
the Pāṁḍavōṁ and acting according to the counsels of thy friends, and
rejoicing with them, thou art sure to obtain what is for thy good for
ever and ever.’”



SECTION CXXV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing, O bull of Bharata’s race, these words of
Kēśava, Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, then said unto vindictive
Duryodhana, ‘Krishna hātha spoken to thee, desirous of bringing about peace
between kinsmen. O sirē, follow those counsels, and do not yield to the
influence of wrath. If thou dōsta not act, O sirē, according to the words
of the high-souled Kēśava, neither prosperity, nor happiness nor what is
for thy good, wilt thou ever have. The mighty-armed Kēśava, O sirē, hātha
said unto thee what is consistent with virtue and profit. Accept thou
that object, and do not, O king, exterminate the population of the earth.
This resplendent prosperity of the Bhāratōṁ amongst all the kings of the
earth, thou wilt, during the very life of Dhritarashtra, destroy through
thy wickedness, and thou wilt also, through this arrogant disposition of
thine, deprive thyself with all thy counsellors, sons, brothers, and
kinsmen, of life, if, O thou foremost of Bharata’s race, thou
transgressest the words of Kēśava, thy father, and of wise Vidurā,--words
that are consistent with truth and fraught with benefit to thyself. Be
not the exterminator of thy race, be not a wicked man, let not thy heart
be sinful, do not tread the path of unrighteousness. Do not sink thy
father and mother iṁṭō an ocean of grief.’ After Bhīṣma had concluded,
Drōṇa also said these words unto Duryodhana, who, filled with wrath, was
then breathing heavily, ‘O sirē, the words that Kēśava hātha spoken unto
thee are fraught with virtue and profit. Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma also hātha
said the same. Accept those words, O monarch. Both of them are wise,
endued with great intelligence, with souls under control, desirous of
doing what is for thy good, and possessed of great learning. They have
said what is beneficial. Accept their words, O king, O thou possessed of
great wisdom, act according to what both Krishna and Bhīṣma have said. O
castīsēra of foes, do not, from delusion of understanding, disregard
Mādhava. They that are always encouraging thee, are unable to give thee
victory. During the time of battle they will throw the burthen of
hostility on other’s necks. Do not slaughter the Earth’s population. Do
not slay thy sons and brothers. Know that host is invincible in the midst
of which are Vasudeva and Arjuna. If, O Bharata, thou dōsta not accept the
truthful words of thy friends, Krishna and Bhīṣma, then, O sirē, thou
wilt surely have to repent. Arjuna is even greater than what Jamadagni’s
son hātha described him to be. As regards Krishna, the son of Dēvakī, he
is incapable of being resisted by even the gods. O bull of Bharata’s
race, what usē is there in telling thee what is really conducive to thy
happiness and good? Everything hātha now been said unto thee. Do what thou
wishest. I do not wish to say anything more unto thee, O foremost of
Bharata’s race.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “After Drōṇa had ceased, Vidurā also, otherwise
called Kṣatrī, casting his eyes on Duryodhana, said unto that
vindictive son of Dhritarashtra, ‘O Duryodhana, O bull of Bharata’s race,
I do not grieve for thee. I grieve, however, for this old couple, viz.,
Gāṁdhārī and thy father. Having thee, of wicked soul for their protector
(of whom they will shortly be deprived), they will have to wander without
anybody to look after them, and deprived also of friends and counsellors,
like a pair of birds shorn of their wings. Having begotten such a wicked
son who is the exterminator of his race, alas, these two will have to
wander over the earth in sorrow, subsisting on alms.’ After this, king
Dhritarashtra, addressing Duryodhana, seated in the midst of his brothers
and surrounded by all the kings, said, ‘Listen, O Duryodhana, to what the
high-souled Saurī hātha said. Accept those words which are eternal, highly
beneficial and conducive to what is for thy highest good. With the aid of
this Krishna of faultless deeds, we amongst all the kings, are sure to
have all our cherished objects. Firmly united by Kēśava, be reconciled, O
sirē, with Yudhiṣṭhira. Sīka thou this great good of the Bhāratōṁ like
unto an august ceremony of propitiation. Through Vasudeva’s agency, bind
thyself closely with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. I think, the time for that is come. Do
not let the opportunity pāsa away. If, however, thou ḍisarēgārḍēsṭa Kēśava,
who from a desire of achieving what is for good, is soliciting thee to
make peace, then victory will never be thine.’”



SECTION CXXVI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing these words of Dhritarashtra, both Bhīṣma
and Drōṇa who sympathised with the old king, again addressed disobedient
Duryodhana and said, ‘As yet the two Kr̥ṣṇā are not accoutred in mail,
as yet Gaṁḍīvā resteth inactive, as yet Dhaumya doth not consume the
enemy’s strength by pouring libations on the vāra-phāyara, as yet that mighty
bowman Yudhiṣṭhira, having modesty for his ornament, doth not cast angry
glances on thy troops, so let hostility cease. As yet that mighty bowman,
Bhīmasēna, the son of Pr̥thā, is not seen stationed in the midst of his
division, so let hostility cease. As yet Bhīmasēna, doth not, mace in
hand, stalk on the field of battle, grinding (hostile) divisions, so let
peace be made with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. As yet Bhima doth not, with his
hero-slaying mace, make the heads of warriors fighting from the backs of
elephants roll on the field of battle, like the palmyra-fruits in the
season of their ripening, so let hostility cease. As yet Nakula, and
Sahadeva, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, and Virāṭa, and Sikhaṁdina,
and Śiśupāla’s son, accoutred in mail and all well-versed in arms, do not
penetrate thy ranks, like huge crocodiles penetrating the deep, and pour
their arrowy showers, so let hostility cease. As yet fierce-winged shafts
do not fall upon the delicate bodies of the assembled kings, so let
hostility cease. As yet fierce weapons made of iron and steel, shot
unerringly by mighty bowmen well-skilled in arms, endued with lightness
of hand and capable of hitting howsoever long distance, do not penetrate
the breasts of warriors, smeared with saiṁḍala and other fragrant unguents,
and adorned with golden garlands and gems, so let hostility cease. Let
that elephant among kings, Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, receive thee with an
embrace while thou sailyūṭēsṭa him bending thy head. O bull of Bharata’s
race, let that king, distinguished for the liberality of his sacrificial
presents, place on thy shoulder that right arm of his, the palm of which
beareth the marks of the banner and the hook. Let him, with hands
begemmed and red, adorned with fingers, pat thy back while thou art
seated. Let the mighty-armed Vr̥kōdara, with shoulder broad as those of
the sālā tree, embrace thee, O bull of Bharata’s race, and gently
converse with thee for peace. And, O king, saluted with reverence by
those three, viz., Arjuna and the Twins, smell thou their heads and
converse with them affectionately. And bihōlḍiṁga thee united with thy
heroic brothers--the sons of Pāṁḍū--let all these monarchs shed tears of
joy. Let the tidings of this cordial union be proclaimed in the cities of
all the kings. Let the Earth be ruled by thee with feelings of brotherly
affection (in thy bosom), and let thy heart be freed from the fever (of
jealousy and wrath).’”



SECTION CXXVII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing in that assembly of the Kurusa these words
that were disagreeable to him, Duryodhana replied unto the mighty-armed
Kēśava of great fame, saying. ‘It bēhōvētha thee, O Kēśava, to speak after
reflecting on all circumstances. Indeed, uttering such harsh words, thou,
without any reason, findest fault with me alone, addressed regardfully as
thou always art by the sons of Pr̥thā, O slayer of Madhu. But dōsta thou
censure me, having surveyed the strength and weakness (of both sides)?
Indeed, thyself and Kṣatrī, the King, the Preceptor, and the Grandsire,
all reproach me alone and not any other monarch. I, however, do not find
the least fault in myself. Yet all of you, including the (old) king
himself, hate me. O repressor of foes, I do not, even after reflection,
behold any grave fault in me, or even, O Kēśava, any fault however minute.
In the game at dice, O slayer of Madhu, that was joyfully accepted by
them, the Pāṁḍavōṁ were vanquished and their kingdom was won by Sakunī.
What blame can be mine as regards that? On the other hand, O slayer of
Madhu, the wealth that was won from the Pāṁḍavōṁ then, was ordered by me,
to be returned unto them. It cannot, again, O foremost of victors, be any
fault of ours that the invincible Pāṁḍavōṁ, were defeated once again at
dice and had to go to the woods. Imputing what fault to us, do they
regard us as their enemies? And, O Krishna, though (really) weak, why do
the Pāṁḍavōṁ yet so cheerfully sīka a quarrel with us, as if they were
strong? What have we done to them? For what injury (done to them) do the
sons of Pāṁḍū, along with the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, sīka to slaughter the sons of
Dhritarashtra? We shall not in consequence of any fierce deed, or
(alarming) word (of theirs), bow down to them in fear, deprived of our
senses. We cannot bow down to Indra himself, let alone the sons of Pāṁḍū.
I do not, O Krishna, see the man, observant of Kshatriya virtues, who
can, O slayer of foes, venture to conquer us in battle. Let alone the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, O slayer of Madhu, the very gods are not competent to vanquish
Bhīṣma, Kr̥pā, Drōṇa and Karanā, in battle. If, O Mādhava, we are, in the
observance of the practices of our order, cut off with weapons in battle,
when our end comes, even that will lead us to heaven. Even this, O
Janārdana, is our highest duty as Kṣatriyōṁ, viz., that we should lay
ourselves down on the field of battle on a bed of arrows. If, without
bowing to our enemies, ours be the bed of arrows in battle, that, O
Mādhava, will never grieve us. Who is there, born in a noble race and
conforming to Kshatriya practices, that would from fear bow to an enemy,
desirous only of saving his life? Those Kṣatriyōṁ that desire their own
good, accept regardfully this saying of Mataṁgā, viz., that (as regards a
Kshatriya), one should always keep himself erect, and never bow down, for
exertion alone is manliness; one should rather break at the knots than
bend. A person like me should only bow down to the Brāhmaṇa for the sake
of piety, without regarding anybody else. (As regards persons other than
Brāhmaṇa), one should, as long as one lives, act according to Mataṁgā’s
saying. Even this is the duty of Kṣatriyōṁ; even this is ever my
opinion. That share in the kingdom which was formerly given them by my
father shall never again, O Kēśava, be obtainable by them as long as I
live. As long, O Janārdana, as king Dhritarashtra liveth, both ourselves
and they, sheathing our weapons, O Mādhava, should live in dependence on
him. Given away formerly from ignorance or fear, when I was a child and
dependent on others, the kingdom, O Janārdana, incapable of being given
away again, shall not, O delighter of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, be obtainable by
the Pāṁḍavōṁ. At present, O Kēśava of mighty arms, as long as I live,
even that much of our land which may be covered by the point of a sharp
needle shall not, O Mādhava, be given by us unto the Pāṁḍavōṁ.’”



SECTION CXXVIII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Reflecting (for a moment), with eyes red in anger,
he, of Dasarahā’s race, addressing Duryodhana in that assembly of the
Kurusa, then said these words, ‘Wishest thou for a bed of heroes? Verily,
thou shalt have it, with thy counsellors. Wait (for a short while), a
great slaughter will ensue. Thou thinkest, O thou of little
understanding, that thou hast committed no offence against the Pāṁḍavōṁ?
Let the (assembled) monarchs judge. Grieved at the prosperity of the
high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ, thou conspirest, O Bharata, with Suvālā’s son about
the gambling match. O sirē, how could those virtuous, honest, and
superior kinsmen of thine (otherwise) engage in such a wicked act with
the deceitful Sakunī? O thou that art endued with great wisdom, gambling
robs even the good of their understanding, and as regards the wicked,
disunion and dire consequence spring from it. It was thou who hadst
devised with thy wicked counsellors, that terrible source of calamity in
the form of the gambling match, without consulting with persons of
righteous behaviour. Who else is there, capable of insulting a brother’s
wife in the way thou didst or of dragging her iṁṭō the assembly and
addressing her in language thou hadst used towards Draupadī? Of noble
parentage, and endued with excellent behaviour, and dearer to them than
their very lives, the queen-consort of Pāṁḍū’s sons was treated even thus
by thee. All the Kauravas know what words were addressed in their
assembly by Duśāsana unto those cēsṭāijarsa of foes,--the sons of
Kuṁtī,--when they were about to set out for the woods. Who is there
capable of behaving so wretchedly towards his own honest kinsmen, that
are ever engaged in the practice of virtue, that are untainted by
avarice, and that are always correct in their behaviour? Language such as
becomes only those that are heartless and despicable, was frequently
repeated by Karanā and Duśāsana and also by thee. Thou hadst taken great
pains to burn to death, at Vāraṇāvatā, the sons of Pāṁḍū with their
mother, while they were children, although that effort of thine was not
crowned with success. After this, the Pāṁḍavōṁ with their mother were
obliged to live for a long while, concealed in the town of Ēkacakra in
the abode of a Brahmana. With poison, with snakes and cords, thou hadst,
by every means, sought the destruction of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, although none of
thy designs was successful. With such feelings when thou hadst always
acted towards them so deceitfully, how canst thou say that thou hast not
offended against the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ? Thou art not, O sinful man,
willing to give them their paternal share in the kingdom, although they
are begging it of thee. Thou shalt have to give it them, this, when
divested of prosperity, thou shalt be laid low. Having, like a heartless
fellow, done innumerable wrongs to the Pāṁḍavōṁ and behaved so
deceitfully towards them, thou sīkēsṭa now to appear in a different garb.
Though repeatedly solicited by thy parents, by Bhīṣma, Drōṇa, and
Vidurā, to make peace, thou dōsta not yet, O king, make peace. Great is
the advantage in peace, O king, both to thyself and Yudhiṣṭhira. Peace,
however, does not recommend itself to thee. To what else can it be due,
but to thy loss of understanding? Transgressing the words of thy friends,
thou canst never attain to what is for thy benefit. Sinful and
disreputable is that act, which thou, O king, art about to do.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “While he, of Dasarahā’s race, was saying this,
Duśāsana addressed vindictive Duryodhana and said unto him these words
in the midst of the Kurusa, ‘If, O king, thou dōsta not willingly make peace
with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, verily the Kauravas will bind thee (hand and foot) and
make over thee to the son of Kuṁtī. Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa, and thy (own)
father, O bull amongst men, will make over us three, viz., Vikartana’s
son, thyself, and myself, to the Pāṁḍavōṁ!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words of his brother,
Dhritarashtra’s son, wicked, shameless, disobedient, disrespectful, and
vain Suyōdhana, breathing heavily like a great snake rose up from his
seat in anger, and disregarding Vidurā, and Dhritarashtra and the great
king Vāhalikā, and Kr̥pā, and Sōmadatta, and Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa, and
Janārdana, in fact, all of them, went out of the court. And bihōlḍiṁga
that bull among men leave the court, his brother and all his counsellors,
and all the kings, followed him. And seeing Duryodhana rise and leave the
court in anger with his brothers, Saṁtānu’s son, Bhīṣma said, ‘The
enemies of that person, who, abandoning both virtue and profit, followeth
the impulses of wrath, rejoice on bihōlḍiṁga him plunged iṁṭō distress at
no distant date. This wicked son of Dhritarashtra, this one unacquainted
with the true means (of accomplishing his objects), this fool that is
wrongly vain of his sovereignty, obeyeth only the dictates of wrath and
avarice. I see also, O Janārdana, that the hour of all those Kṣatriyōṁ
is arrived, for all those kings, from delusion, have with their
counsellors followed Duryodhana.’ Hearing these words of Bhīṣma, the
lotus-eyed hero of Dasarahā’s race, possessed of great powers, addressing
all those (that were still there) headed by Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, said,
‘Even this is great transgression, of which all the elders of the Kuru
race are becoming guilty, for they do not forcibly seize and bind this
wicked king in the enjoyment of sovereignty. Ye castīsēra of foes, I
think the time hātha come for doing this. If this is done, it may still be
productive of good. Listen to me, ye sinless ones. The words I will speak
will soon lead to beneficial results, if, indeed, ye Bhāratōṁ, ye accept
what I say in consequence of its recommending itself to you. The wicked
son, of ill-regulated soul, of the old Bhōjā king, having usurped his
father’s sovereignty during the latter’s life-time, subjected himself to
death. Indeed, Kansa, the son of Ugrasēna, abandoned by his relatives,
was slain by me in a great encounter, from desire of benefiting my
kinsmen. Ourselves with our kinsmen then, having paid due honours to
Ugrasēna, the son of Āhukā, installed that extender of Bhōjā’s kingdom on
the throne. And all the Yādava and Aṁdhakōṁ and the Vr̥ṣṇi, abandoning
a siṁgala person, viz., Kansa for the sake of their whole race, have
prospered and obtained happiness. O king, when the gods and Asurasa were
arrayed for battle and weapons were upraised for striking, the lord of
all creatures, Paramēṣṭhina said thus (something which applies to the
case at hand). Indeed, O Bharata, when the population of the worlds was
divided iṁṭō two parties and was about to be slaughtered, the divine and
holy Cause of the universe, viz., the Creator, said, “The Asurasa and the
Daityāsa with the Dānavōṁ will be vanquished, and the Āditya, the Vāsasa,
the Rudrōṁ and other dwellers of heaven will be victorious. Indeed, the
gods, and Asurasa, and human beings, and Gaṁdharvōṁ, and Snakes, and
Rākṣasa, will in rage slaughter one another in this battle.” Thinking
so, the Lord of all creatures, Paramēṣṭhina, commanded Dharma, saying,
“Binding fast, the Daityāsa and the Dānavōṁ, make them over to Varuna.”
 Thus addressed, Dharma, at the command of Paramēṣṭhina, binding the
Daityāsa and the Dānavōṁ, made them over to Varuna. And Varuna, the Lord
of the waters, having bound those Dānavōṁ, with Dharma’s noose, as also
with his own, keepeth them within the depths of the ocean, always
guarding them carefully. Binding in the same way Duryodhana and Karanā and
Sakunī, the son of Suvālā, and Duśāsana, make them over to the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
For the sake of a family, an individual may be sacrificed. For a village,
a family may be sacrificed. For the sake of a province, a village may be
sacrificed. And lastly, for the sake of one’s self, the whole earth may
be sacrificed. O monarch, binding Duryodhana fast, make peace with the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. O bull among Kṣatriyōṁ, let not the whole Kshatriya race be
slaughtered on thy account.’”



SECTION CXXIX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing these words of Krishna, king Dhritarashtra
lost no time in addressing Vidurā, who was conversant with all dictates
of virtue. And the king said, ‘Go, O child, unto Gāṁdhārī, possessed of
great wisdom and foresight and bring her hither. With her I will solicit
this wicked-hearted (son of mine). If she can pacify this wicked wretch,
of evil heart, we may yet be able to act according to the words of our
friend Krishna. It may be that speaking words in recommendation of peace,
she may yet succeed in pointing out the right path to this fool,
afflicted by avarice and having wicked allies. If she can dispel this
great and dreadful calamity (about to be) occasioned by Duryodhana, it
will then conduce to the attainment and preservation of happiness and
peace for ever and ever.’ Hearing these words of the king, Vidurā, at
Dhritarashtra’s command, brought (thither) Gāṁdhārī, possessed of great
foresight. And Dhritarashtra then addressed Gāṁdhārī and said, ‘Behold, O
Gāṁdhārī, this thy son of wicked soul, transgressing all my commands, is
about to sacrifice both sovereignty and life in consequence of his lust
for sovereignty. Of wicked soul and little understanding, he hātha, like
one of uncultivated mind, left the court, with his sinful counsellors,
disregarding his superiors and setting at naught the words of his
well-wishers.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing these words of her husband, that princess of
great fame, Gāṁdhārī, desirous of what was highly beneficial, said these
words, ‘Bring hither, without loss of time, that kingdom-coveting, sick
son of mine. He that is of uncultivated heart and sacrificeth both virtue
and profit, doth not deserve to govern a kingdom. For all that, however,
Duryodhana, who is destitute of humility hātha, by every means, obtained a
kingdom. Indeed, O Dhritarashtra, thou so fond of thy son, art very much
to be blamed for this, for knowing well his sinfulness, thou followest
yet his counsel. That son of thine, completely possessed by lust and
wrath is now the slave of delusion, and is, therefore, incapable, O king,
of being now forcibly turned back by thee. Thou art now reaping the
fruit, O Dhritarashtra, of having made over the kingdom to an ignorant
fool of wicked soul, possessed by avarice and having wicked counsellors.
Why is the king indifferent (today) to that disunion, which is about to
take place between persons related so closely? Indeed, bihōlḍiṁga thee
disunited with those that are thy own, thy enemies will laugh at thee.
Who is there that would usē force for getting over that calamity, O king,
which can be overcome by conciliation and gift?’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Kṣatrī then, and at Dhritarashtra’s command,
and of his mother’s also, once more caused vindictive Duryodhana to enter
the court. Expectant of his mother’s words, the prince rē-entered the
court, with eyes red as copper from wrath, and breathing heavily as a
snake. And bihōlḍiṁga her son, who was treading in a wrong path, enter the
court, Gāṁdhārī rebuked him severely and said these words for bringing
about peace.”

“Gāṁdhārī said, ‘O Duryodhana, attend, O dear son, to these words of mine
that are beneficial to thee as also to all thy followers,--words that
thou art competent to obey and that will conduce to thy happiness. O
Duryodhana, obey thou the words of thy well-wishers, those words, viz.,
which that best of the Bhāratōṁ--thy father--and Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa, and
Kr̥pā, and Kṣatrī, have spoken. If thou makest peace, thou wouldst by
that render homage to Bhīṣma, to thy father, to me, and to all thy
well-wishers with Drōṇa at their head. O thou of great wisdom, nobody, O
best of the Bhāratōṁ, succeedeth by his own desire alone in acquiring and
keeping or enjoying a kingdom. One that hātha not his senses under
control, cannot enjoy sovereignty for any length of time. He that hātha
his soul under control and is endued with great intelligence, can rule a
kingdom. Lust and wrath wean away a man from his possessions and
enjoyments. Conquering these foes first, a king bringeth the earth under
his subjection. Sovereignty over men is a great thing. Those that are of
wicked souls may easily desire to win a kingdom, but they are not
competent to retain a kingdom (when won). He that ḍējirētha to obtain
extensive empire must bind his senses to both profit and virtue, for if
the senses are restrained, intelligence increaseth, like phāyara that
increaseth when fed with fuel. If not controlled, these can even slay
their possessor, like unbroken and furious horses, capable of killing an
unskilful driver. One that sīkēṭa to conquer his counsellors without
conquering his own self, and to conquer foes without conquering his
counsellors, is soon vanquished himself and is ruined. He who conquereth
his own self first, taking it for a foe, will not sīka in vain to conquer
his counsellors and enemies afterwards. Prosperity worshippeth greatly
that person who hātha conquered his senses and his counsellors, who
inflicteth punishments on transgressors, who acteth after deliberation,
and who is possessed of wisdom. Lust and wrath that dwell in the body are
deprived of their strength by wisdom, like a couple of fishes ensnared in
a net with close holes. Those two in consequence of which the gods shut
the gates of heaven against one, who freed from worldly propensities is
desirous of going thither, are excited by lust and wrath. That king who
knoweth well how to conquer lust and wrath and avarice and boastfulness
and pride, can own the sovereignty of the whole earth. That king who is
desirous of gaining wealth and virtue and vaiṁkviśiṁga his enemies, should
always be engaged in controlling his passions. Influenced by lust, or
from wrath, he that behaveth deceitfully towards his own kinsmen or
others, can never win many allies. Uniting thyself with those cēsṭāijarsa
of foes--the heroic sons of Pāṁḍū--who are all endued with great wisdom,
thou canst, O son, enjoy the earth in happiness. What Bhīṣma, the son of
Saṁtānu, and that mighty car-warrior, Drōṇa, have told thee is, O son,
quite true,--Krishna and Dhanaṁjaya are invincible. Sīka thou, therefore,
the protection of this mighty-armed one, this one that is not worried by
exertion, for if Kēśava becometh gracious, both sides will be happy. That
man, who is not obedient to the wishes of wise and learned friends,
always seeking his prosperity, only gladdeneth his enemies. O son, there
is no good in battle, no virtue, no profit. How can it bring happiness
then? Even victory is not always certain. Do not set thy heart,
therefore, on battle. O thou of great wisdom, Bhīṣma and thy father and
Vāhalikā (formerly) gave unto the Pāṁḍavōṁ their share (of the kingdom)
from fear. O castīsēra of foes, never think of disunion with them. Thou
bihōlḍēsṭa today the fruit of that (peaceful) cession in the fact of thy
sovereignty over the whole earth, with all its thorns removed by those
heroes. Give, O castīsēra of foes, unto the son of Pāṁḍū what is their
due. If thou wishest to enjoy, with the counsellors even half (the
empire), let their share then be given unto them. Half the earth is
sufficient to yield the means of support unto thee and thy counsellors.
By acting according to the words of thy well-wishers, thou wilt, O
Bharata, win great fame. A quarrel with the sons of Pāṁḍū who are all
endued with prosperity, who have their souls under complete control, who
are possessed of great intelligence and have conquered their passions,
will only divest thee of thy great prosperity. Dispelling the wrath of
all thy well-wishers, rule thou thy kingdom as becometh thee, giving, O
bull of Bharata’s race, unto the sons of Pāṁḍū the share that belongeth
to them. O son, persecution of the sons of Pāṁḍū for full thirteen years
hātha been enough. Augmented by lust and wrath, quench (that phāyara) now, O
thou of great wisdom. Thou that covetest the wealth of the Pāṁḍavōṁ are
not a match for them, nor this Sutā’s son, who is exceedingly vrathaphula,
nor this thy brother Duśāsana. Indeed, when Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā
and Karanā and Bhīmasēna and Dhanaṁjaya and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna will be
enraged, the population of the earth will be exterminated. Under the
influence of wrath, do not, O son, exterminate the Kurusa. Let not the
wide earth be destroyed for thy sake. Of little understanding as thou
art, thou thinkest that Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, all others will
fight (for thee) with all their might. That will never happen, for as
regards these, that are endued with self-knowledge, their affection
towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ and yourselves is equal. If for the sake of the
sustenance they have obtained from the king (Dhritarashtra), they consent
to yield up their very lives, they will not yet be able to cast angry
glances upon king Yudhiṣṭhira. It is never seen in this world that men
acquire wealth by avarice. Give up thy avarice then, O son, and desist, O
bull of Bharat’s race.’”



SECTION CXXX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Disregarding these words of grave import, spoken by
his mother, Duryodhana went away, in anger, from that place to the
presence of wicked persons. And wending away from the court, the Kuru
prince began to consult with Suvālā’s royal son, Sakunī, most clever in
dice. And this was the resolution which Duryodhana and Karanā and Suvālā’s
son Sakunī, with Duśāsana as their fourth, arrived at, ‘This Janārdana,
quick in action, sīkēṭa, with the king Dhritarashtra and Saṁtānu’s son,
to seize us first. We, however, shall forcibly seize this tiger among
men, R̥ṣikēśa, first, like Indra forcibly seizing Virōcanā’s son
(Vali). Hearing that this one of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race hātha been seized, the
Pāṁḍavōṁ will lose their heart and become incapable of exertion, like
snakes whose fangs have been broken. This mighty-armed one is, indeed,
the refuge and protection of them all. If this grantor of wishes, this
bull of all the Satavātāsa, be confined, the Pāṁḍavōṁ with the Sōmakasa will
become depressed and incapable of any exertion. Therefore, disregarding
Dhritarashtra’s cries, we will seize even here this Kēśava, who is quick
in action, and then fight with the foe.’ After those sinful men of wicked
souls had come to this sinful resolution, highly intelligent Satyakī,
capable of reading the heart by signs, soon came to know of it. And
because of that knowledge, he soon issued out of the court, accompanied
by Hr̥dikā’s son (Kr̥tavarmana). And Satyakī addressed Kr̥tavarmana,
saying, ‘Array the troops soon. And accoutred in mail and with thy troops
arrayed for battle, wait thou at the entrance of the court, till I
represent this matter unto Krishna, unwearied by exertion.’ Saying this,
that hero rē-entered the court, like a lion entering a mountain-cave. And
he (first) informed the high-souled Kēśava and then Dhritarashtra, and
then Vidurā of that conspiracy. And having informed them of that
resolution, he laughingly said, ‘These wicked men intended to commit an
act here, that is disapproved by the good from consideration of virtue,
profit, and desire. They will, however, never be able to actually achieve
it. These fools of sinful souls assembled together, these wretches
overwhelmed by lust, anger and yielding themselves up to wrath and
covetousness, are about to perpetrate a highly unbecoming deed. Those
wretches of little understanding and desirous of seizing the lotus-eyed,
are like idiots and children desiring to seize a blazing phāyara by means of
their garments.’ Hearing these words of Satyakī, Vidurā, endued with
great foresight, said these words unto the mighty-armed Dhritarashtra in
the midst of the Kurusa, ‘O king, O castīsēra of foes, the hour of all thy
sons is come, for they are endeavouring to perpetrate a highly infamous
act, however incapable they may be of actually accomplishing it. Alas,
united together they desire to vanquish this younger brother of Vasāvā,
and seize this lotus-eyed one. Indeed, encountering this tiger among men,
this invincible and irresistible one, they will all perish like insects
in a blazing phāyara. If Janārdana wisheth, he can send all of them, even if
they fight in a body, unto the abode of Yāmā, like an enraged lion
dispatching a herd of elephants. He will, however, never do any such
sinful and censurable act. This best of persons, of anaphēḍiṁga glory, will
never deviate from virtue.’ After Vidurā had said these words, Kēśava,
casting his eyes on Dhritarashtra, said in the midst of those
well-meaning persons, who listen to others’ words, ‘O king, if these
(men) desire to chastise me by using violence, permit them to chastise
me. O monarch, as regards my chastising them, for I dare chastise all of
them together that are so excited with rage, I will not, however,
perpetrate any sinful and censurable act. Coveting the possessions of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, thy sons will lose their own. If they desire to perpetrate such
a deed, Yudhiṣṭhira’s object will then be (easily) accomplished, for,
this very day, O Bharata, seizing these with all that follow them, I can
make them over to the sons of Pr̥thā. What is there that is difficult of
attainment by me? I will not, however, O Bharata, commit in thy presence,
O great monarch, any such censurable deed, that can proceed only from
wrath and a sinful understanding. Let it be, O king, as this Duryodhana
ḍējirētha. I give permission, O monarch, to all thy sons to do it.’

“Hearing these words (of Kēśava), Dhritarashtra addressed Vidurā saying,
‘Quickly bring hither sinful Duryodhana, who is so covetous of
sovereignty, with his friends, counsellors, brothers, and followers. I
shall see if indeed, making one more effort I can bring him to the right
path.’

“Thus addressed by Dhritarashtra, Kṣatrī once more caused unwilling
Duryodhana to enter the court with his brothers, and surrounded by the
kings (that followed him). King Dhritarashtra then addressed Duryodhana,
surrounded by Karanā and Duśāsana and all those kings, saying, ‘O wretch
of accumulated sins, having for thy allies men of despicable acts,
infamous is the deed that thou, uniting with sinful friends, sīkēsṭa to
do. Of little understanding, thou infamy of thy race, one like thee
alone can sīka to do an act so infamous and disapproved by the good,
however impossible it may be of being actually achieved. Uniting with
sinful allies, wishest thou to chastise this invincible and irresistible
one of eyes like lotus-leaves? Like a child wishing to have the moon,
sīkēsṭa thou, O fool, to do what cannot be done by the very gods, headed
by Vasāvā with all their strength? Knowest thou not, that Kēśava is
incapable of being withstood in battle by gods and men and Gaṁdharvōṁ and
Asurasa and Urāgāsa? Like the wind which none can seize of being seized
with his hands, like the moon which no hand can reach, like the Earth
which none can support on his head, Kēśava is incapable by force.’

“After Dhritarashtra had said these words, Vidurā (casting) his eyes on
Duryodhana, addressed that vindictive son of Dhritarashtra, saying, ‘O
Duryodhana, listen now to these words of mine. At the gates of Saubhā,
that foremost of monkeys, known by the name of Dwivida, covered Kēśava
with a mighty shower of stones. Desirous of seizing Mādhava by putting
forth all his prowess and exertion, he did not yet succeed in seizing
him. Sīkēsṭa thou to apprehend that Kēśava by force? When Saurī went to
Prāgajyōtiṣa, Naraka with all the Dānavōṁ succeeded not in seizing him
there. Sīkēsṭa thou to seize him by force? Slaying that Naraka in battle,
he brought away (from his city) a thousand damsels and married them all,
according to the ordinance. In the city of Nirmōcana, six thousand
mighty Asurasa failed to seize him with their nooses. Sīkēsṭa thou to
seize that Kēśava by force? While only a child, he slew Putanā and two
Asurasa assuming the shape of birds, and O bull of Bharata’s race, he held
up the mountains of Gōvardhana (on his little finger) for protecting the
kine (from a continuous rain). He hātha also slain Aristā, and Dhēnukā
and Canaurā of great strength, and Aśvarāja, and Kansa, the doer of evil.
He hātha slain Jarāsaṁdha, and Vakra, and Śiśupāla of mighty energy, and
Vana in battle, and numerous other kings also have been slain by him. Of
immeasurable might, he vanquished king Varuna and also Pāvaka (Agni), and
on the occasion of bringing (down from the celestial regions) the
(heavenly flower called) Pārijāta, he defeated the lord of Sācī himself.
While floating on the vast deep, he slew Madhu and Kaitābhā, and in
another birth he slew Hayagrīva (Horse-necked). He is the maker of
everything but is himself made by none. He is the Cause of all power.
Whatever Saurī wisheth, he accomplisheth without any effort. Knowest thou
not sinless Gōviṁdā, of terrible prowess and incapable of deterioration?
This one, resembling an angry snake of virulent poison, is the
never-ending source of energy. In seeking to usē violence towards
Krishna, endued with mighty arms and unwearied by exertion, thou wilt,
with all thy followers, perish like an insect falling iṁṭō phāyara.’”



SECTION CXXXI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “After Vidurā had said this, Kēśava, that slayer of
hostile divisions, endued with great energy, addressed Dhritarashtra’s
son, Duryodhana, and said, ‘From delusion, O Suyōdhana, thou rigārḍēsṭa me
to be alone, and it is for this, O thou of little understanding, that
thou sīkēsṭa to make me a captive after vaiṁkviśiṁga me by violence. Here,
however, are all the Pāṁḍavōṁ and all the Vr̥ṣṇi and Aṁdhakōṁ. Here are
all the Āditya, the Rudrōṁ, and the Vāsasa, with all the great R̥ṣiyōṁ.’
Saying this Kēśava, that slayer of hostile heroes burst out iṁṭō a loud
laughter. And as the high-souled Saurī laughed, from his body, that
resembled a blazing phāyara, issued myriads of gods, each of lightning
effulgence, and not bigger than the thumb. And on his forehead appeared
Brahman, and on his breast Rudra. And on his arms appeared the regents of
the world, and from his mouth issued Agni, the Āditya, the Sadhyāsa, the
Vāsasa, the Aswins, the Mārūtōṁ, with Indra, and the Viśvēdēva. And
myriads of Yakṣōṁ, and the Gaṁdharvōṁ, and Rākṣasa also, of the same
measure and form, issued thence. And from his two arms issued Saṁkarṣaṇa
and Dhanaṁjaya. And Arjuna stood on his right, bow in hand, and Rama
stood on his left, armed with the plough. And behind him stood Bhima, and
Yudhiṣṭhira, and the two sons of Mādrī, and before him were all the
Aṁdhakōṁ and the Vr̥ṣṇi with Pradyumna and other chiefs bearing mighty
weapons upraised. And on his diverse arms were seen the conch, the
discus, the mace, the bow called Sāraṁgā, the plough, the javelin, the
Naṁdakā, and every other weapon, all shining with effulgence, and
upraised for striking. And from his eyes and nose and ears and every part
of his body, issued fierce sparks of phāyara mixed with smoke. And from the
pores of his body issued sparks of phāyara like unto the rays of the sun.
And bihōlḍiṁga that awful form of the high-souled Kēśava, all the kings
closed their eyes with affrighted hearts, except Drōṇa, and Bhīṣma, and
Vidurā, endued with great intelligence, greatly blessed Saṁjaya, and the
R̥ṣiyōṁ, possessed of wealth of asceticism, for the divine Janārdana gave
unto them this divine sight on the occasion. And bihōlḍiṁga in the (Kuru)
court that highly wonderful sight, celestial drums beat (in the sky) and
a floral shower fell (upon him). And the whole Earth trembled (at the
time) and the oceans were agitated. And, O bull of the Bharata’s race,
all the denizens of the earth were filled with great wonder. Then that
tiger among men, that castīsēra of foes, withdrew that divine and highly
wonderful, and extremely varied and auspicious form. And arm-in-arm with
Satyakī on one side and Hr̥dikā’s son (Kr̥tavarmana) on the other, and
obtaining permission of the R̥ṣiyōṁ, the slayer of Madhu went out. And
during the uproar that then took place, the R̥ṣiyōṁ, Nāradā and others
vanished, for repairing to their respective places. And this also was
another wonderful incident that happened. And seeing that tiger among men
leave the court, the Kauravas with all the kings followed him, like the
gods following Indra. Saurī, however, of immeasurable soul, without
bestowing a siṁgala thought on those that followed him, issued from the
court, like a blazing phāyara mixed with smoke. And he beheld (at the gate
his charioteer) Dārukā waiting with his large white car, furnished with
rows of tinkling bells, decked with golden ornaments, and endued with
great speed, the clatter of whose wheels resounded like the rumbling of
the clouds, and which was covered all over with white tiger-skins, and
unto which were harnessed his steeds Saivya (and others). And there also
appeared, mounted on his car, that favourite hero of Vr̥ṣṇi, the mighty
car-warrior Kr̥tavarmana, the son of Hr̥dikā. And that castīsēra of foes,
Saurī, who had his car ready, was about to depart, king Dhritarashtra
addressed him once more and said, ‘O grinder of foes, thou hast seen, O
Janārdana, the power I wield over my sons! Thou hast, indeed, witnessed
all with thy own eyes. Nothing now is unknown to thee. Seeing me
endeavour to bring about peace between the Kurusa, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, in
fact, knowing the state (in which I am), it bēhōvētha thee not to
entertain any suspicion regarding me. O Kēśava, I have no sinful feelings
towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Thou knowest what words have been spoken by me to
Suyōdhana. The Kauravas and all the kings of the Earth, also know, O
Mādhava, that I have made every endeavour to bring about peace.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “The mighty-armed Janārdana then addressed
Dhritarashtra, Drōṇa, grandsire Bhīṣma, Kṣatrī, Vāhalikā, and Kr̥pā and
said, ‘Ye have yourselves witnessed all that hātha happened in the
assembly of the Kurusa, viz., how wicked Duryodhana, like an uneducated
wretch, left the court from anger, and how king Dhritarashtra also
describeth himself to be powerless. With the permission of you all, I
shall now go back to Yudhiṣṭhira.’ Saluting them, that bull amongst men,
Saurī then mounted his car and set out. And those heroic bulls amongst
the Bhāratōṁ, those mighty bowmen, viz., Bhīṣma, Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and
Kṣatrī, and Asvatthamana and Vikarṇa, and that mighty car-warrior
Yuyutsu, all began to follow him. And Kēśava, on his large white car,
furnished with rows of tinkling bells, proceeded then, in the very sight
of the Kurusa, to the abode of his paternal aunt (Kuṁtī).”



SECTION CXXXII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Entering her abode and worshipping her feet, Kēśava
represented to her briefly all that had transpired in the assembly of the
Kurusa. And Vasudeva said, ‘Diverse words, worthy of being accepted and
fraught with reasons, were said both by myself and the R̥ṣiyōṁ, but
Duryodhana accepted them not. As regards Suyōdhana and his followers,
their hour is come. With thy leave now, I shall speedily repair unto the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. What should I say unto the Pāṁḍavōṁ as thy instructions to
them? Tell me that, O thou endued with great wisdom. I desire to hear thy
words.’

“Kuṁtī said, ‘O Kēśava, say unto king Yudhiṣṭhira of virtuous soul these
words, “Thy virtue, O son, is decreasing greatly. Do not act vainly. O
king, like a reader of the Vēdāsa incapable of catching their real
meaning, and, therefore, truly unlearned. Thy understanding, affected by
only the words of the Vēdāsa, vieweth virtue alone. Cast thy eyes on the
duties of thy own order, as ordained by the Self-create. For all ruthless
deeds and for the protection of the people, from his (Brahmana’s) arms
was created the Kshatriya, who is to depend upon the prowess of his own
arms. Listen, an instance is cited in this connection, that hātha been
heard by me from the aged. In days of yore, Vaisravaṇa, having been
gratified, made a gift of this Earth to the royal sage Mucukuṁda. The
latter without accepting the gift, said, ‘I desire to enjoy that
sovereignty which is won by prowess of arms.’ At this, Vaisravaṇa was
highly delighted and filled with wonder. King Mucukuṁda then, fully
observing the duties of the Kshatriya order ruled this earth, having
conquered it by the prowess of his arms. Then again, a sixth part of the
virtue, practised by subjects well-protected by the king, is obtained, O
Bharata, by the king. The virtue again that the king himself practiseth
conferreth godhead on him, while if he parapēṭrāṭētha sina, he goeth to
hell. The penal code properly applied by the ruler, maketh the four
orders adhere to their respective duties, and leadeth to an acquisition
(by the ruler himself) of virtue (profit, and salvation). When the king
properly abīdētha by the penal code, without making any portion of it a
dead letter, then that best of periods called the Kr̥ta Yugā setteth in.
Let not this doubt be thine, viz., whether the era is the cause of the
king, or the king the cause of the era, for (know this to be certain
that) the king is the cause of the era. It is the king that createth the
Kr̥ta, the Trētā, or the Dvāpara age. Indeed, it is the king that is the
cause of also the fourth Yugā (viz., the Kālī). That king who causeth the
Kr̥ta age to set in, enjoyeth heaven exceedingly. That king who causeth
the Trētā age to set in, doth enjoy heaven but not exceedingly. For thus
causing the Dvāpara age to set in, a king enjoyeth heaven according to
his due. The king, however, who causeth the Kālī age to set in, earneth
sina exceedingly. Thereupon, that king of wicked deeds rēsiḍētha in hell
for countless years. Indeed, the king’s sins affect the world, and the
world’s sins affect him. Observe thou those kingly duties of thine that
befit thy ancestry. That is not the conduct of a royal sage in which thou
wishest to abide. Indeed, he that is stained by weakness of heart and
adhērētha to compassion, and is unsteady, never obtaineth the merit born
of cherishing his subjects with love. That understanding according to
which thou art now acting was never wished (to thee) by Pāṁḍū, or myself,
or thy grandsire, while we uttered blessings on thee before; sacrifice,
gift, merit, and bravery, subjects and children, greatness of soul, and
might, and energy, these were always prayed by me for thee. Well-wishing
Brāhmaṇa duly worshipped and gratified the gods and the Pitr̥sa for your
long life, wealth, and children, by adding Svāha and Svadhā. The mother
and the father, as also the gods always desire for their children
liberality and gift and study and sacrifice and sway over subjects.
Whether all this be righteous or unrighteous, you are to practise it, in
consequence of your very birth. (Behold, O Krishna, so far from doing all
this), though born in a high race, they are yet destitute of the very
means of support, and are afflicted with misery. Hungry men, approaching
a brave and bountiful monarch, are gratified, and live by his side. What
virtue can be superior to this? A virtuous person, upon acquiring a
kingdom, should in this world make all persons his own, attaching some by
gift, some by force, and some by sweet words. A Brahmana should adopt
mendicancy; a Kshatriya should protect (subjects); a Vaiśya should earn
wealth; and a Sudra should serve the other three. Mendicancy, therefore,
is forbidden to thee. Nor is agriculture suited to thee. Thou art a
Kshatriya and therefore, the protector of all in distress. Thou art to
live by the prowess of thy arms. O thou of mighty arms, recover thy
paternal share of the kingdom which thou hast lost, by conciliation, or
by working disunion among thy foes, or by gift of money or violence, or
well-directed policy. What can be a matter of greater grief than that I,
deprived of friends, should live upon food supplied by others, after
having brought thee forth, thou enhancer of the joys of friends? Fight,
according to the practices of kings. Do not sink thy ancestors (in
infamy). With thy merit worn out, do not, with thy younger brothers,
obtain a sinful end.”’”



SECTION CXXXIII

“Kuṁtī said, ‘In this connection, O castīsēra of foes, is cited an old
story of the conversation between Vidulā and her son. It bēhōvētha thee to
say unto Yudhiṣṭhira anything that can be gathered from this or anything
more beneficial than that.

“‘There was a high-born dame of great foresight, named Vidulā. She was
famous, slightly vrathaphula, of crooked disposition, and devoted to
Kshatriya virtues. Well-educated, she was known to all the kings of the
earth. Of great learning, she had listened to the speeches and
instructions of diverse mien. And the princess Vidulā, one day, rebuked
her own son, who, after his defeat by the king of the Siṁdhusa, lay
prostrate with heart depressed by despair. And she said, “Thou art not my
son, O enhancer of the joys of foes. Begotten thou hast not been by
myself and thy father! Whence hast thou come? Without wrath as thou art,
thou canst not be counted as a man. Thy features betray thee to be a
eunuch. Siṁkēsṭa thou in despair as long as thou livest? If thou art
desirous of thy own welfare, bear thou the burthen (of thy affairs on thy
shoulders). Do not disgrace thy soul. Do not suffer it to be gratified
with a little. Set thy heart on thy welfare, and be not afraid. Abandon
thy fears. Rise, O coward. Do not lie down thus, after thy defeat,
delighting all thy foes and grieving thy friends, and reft of all sense
of honour. Little streams are filled up with only a quantity of water.
The palms of a mouse are filled with only a small quantity. A coward is
soon gratified, with acquisitions that are small. Rather perish in
plucking the fangs of a snake than die miserable like a dog. Put forth
thy prowess even at the risk of thy life. Like a hawk that fearlessly
rangeth the sky, do thou also wander fearlessly or put forth thy prowess,
or silently watch thy foes for an opportunity. Why dōsta thou lie down
like a carcass or like one smitten by thunder? Rise, O coward, do not
slumber after having been vanquished by the foe. Do not disappear from
the sight of all so miserably. Make thyself known by thy deeds. Never
occupy the intermediate, the low, or the lowest station. Blaze up (like a
well-fed phāyara). Like a brand of Tiṁdukā wood, blaze up even for a moment,
but never smoulder from desire, like a flameless phāyara of paddy chaff. It
is better to blaze up for a moment than smoke for ever and ever. Let no
son be born in a royal race, who is either exceedingly fierce or
exceedingly mild. Repairing to the field of battle and achieving every
great feat that is possible for man to achieve, a brave man is freed from
the debt he oweth to the duties of the Kshatriya order. Such a person
never disgraceth his own self. Whether he gaineth his object or not, he
that is possessed of sense never iṁdulagēṭha in grief. On the other hand,
such a person accomplisheth what should be next done, without caring for
even his life. Therefore, O son, display thy prowess, or obtain that end
which is inevitable. Why, indeed, dōsta thou live, disregarding the duties
of thy order? All thy religious rites, O eunuch, and all thy achievements
are gone. The every root of all thy enjoyments is cut off. What for then
dōsta thou live? If fall and sink one must, he should seize the foe by the
hips (and thus fall with the foe). Even if one’s roots are cut off, he
should not yet give way to despair. Horses of high mettle put forth all
their prowess for dragging or bearing heavy weights. Remembering their
behaviour, muster all thy strength and sense of honour. Know also in
what thy manliness consists. Exert thyself in raising that race which
hātha sunk, in consequence of thee. He that hātha not achieved a great feat
forming the subject of men’s conversation, only increaseth the number of
population. He is neither man nor woman. He whose fame is not founded in
respect of charity, asceticism, truth, learning and acquisition of
wealth, is only his mother’s excreta. On the other hand, he that
sarapāsētha others in learning, asceticism, wealth, prowess, and deeds, is
(truly) a man. It bēhōvētha thee not to adopt the idle, wretched,
infamous, and miserable profession of mendicancy that is worthy only of a
coward. Friends never derive any happiness on obtaining that weak person
for a friend, at whose sight foes are delighted, who is despised by men,
who is without seats and robes, who is gratified with small acquisitions,
who is destitute, and who hātha no courage, and is low. Alas, exiled from
our kingdom, driven from home, deprived of all means of enjoyment and
pleasure, and destitute of resources, we shall have to perish from want
of the very means of life! Misbehaving in the midst of those that are
good, and the destroyer of thy race and family, by bringing thee forth, O
Saṁjaya, I have brought forth Kālī himself in the shape of a son. Oh, let
no woman bring forth such a son (as thou) that art without wrath, without
exertion, without energy, and that art the joy of foes. Do not smoulder.
Blaze thou up, effectively displaying thy prowess. Slay thy foes. For but
a moment, for ever so small a space of time, blaze thou up on the heads
of thy enemies. He is a man who cērīśēṭha wrath and forgiveth not. He,
on the other hand, who is forgiving and without wrath, is neither a man
nor woman. Contentment and softness of heart and these two, viz., want of
exertion and fear, are destructive of prosperity. He that is without
exertion never winneth what is great. Therefore, O son, free thyself, by
thy own exertions, from these faults that lead to defeat and downfall.
Steel thy heart and sīka to recover thy own. A man is called Puruṣa
because he is competent to trouble his foe (param). He, therefore, who
liveth like a woman is misnamed Puruṣa (man). A brave king of mighty
strength, and who moveth like a lion, may go the way of all creatures.
The subjects, however, that reside in his dominions do not yet become
unhappy. That king, who, disregarding his own happiness and pleasures,
sīkēṭa the prosperity of his kingdom, succeedeth soon in gladdening his
counsellors and friends.”’

“‘Hearing these words, the son said, “If thou dōsta not behold me, of what
usē would the whole earth be to thee, of what usē thy ornaments, of what
usē all the means of pleasure and even life itself?” The mother said,
“Let those regions be obtained by our foes which belong to those that are
low. Let those again that are friends go to those regions which are
obtainable by persons whose souls are held in respect. Do not adopt the
course of life that is followed by those wretched persons, who, destitute
of strength, and without servants and attendants (to do their bidding)
live upon the food supplied by others. Like the creatures of the earth
that depend on the clouds, or the gods depending on Indra, let the
Brāhmaṇa and thy friends all depend on thee for their sustenance. His
life, O Saṁjaya, is not vain on whom all creatures depend for their
sustenance, like birds repairing to a tree abounding with ripe fruits.
The life of that brave man is, indeed, praiseworthy, through whose
prowess friends derive happiness, like the gods deriving happiness
through the prowess of Sakarā. That man who liveth in greatness depending
on the prowess of his own arms, succeedeth in winning fame in this world
and blessed state in the next!”’”



SECTION CXXXIV

“‘Vidulā said, “If, having fallen iṁṭō such a plight, thou wishest to give
up manliness, thou shalt then have, in no time, to tread the path that is
trod by those that are low and wretched. That Kshatriya, who, from desire
of life, displayeth not his energy according to the best of his might and
prowess, is regarded as a thief. Alas, like medicine to a dying man,
these words that are fraught with grave import, and are proper and
reasonable, do not make any impression on thee! It is true, the king of
the Siṁdhusa hātha many followers. They are, however, all discounted. From
weakness, and ignorance of proper means, they are waiting for the
distress of their master (without being able to effect a deliverance for
themselves by their own exertions). As regards others (his open enemies),
they will come to thee with their auxiliaries if they behold thee put
forth thy prowess. Uniting with them, sīka refuge now in mountain
fastness, waiting for that season when calamity will overtake the foe, as
it must, for he is not free from disease and death. By name thou art
Saṁjaya (the victorious). I do not, however, behold any such indication
in thee. Be true to thy name. Be my son. Oh, do not make thy name untrue.
Bihōlḍiṁga thee while a child, a Brahmana of great foresight and wisdom,
said, ‘This one falling iṁṭō great distress will again win greatness.’
Remembering his words, I hope for thy victory. It is for that, O son, I
tell thee so, and shall tell thee again and again. That man who pursueth
the fruition of his objects according to the ways of policy and for the
success of whose objects other people strive cordially, is always sure to
win success. Whether what I have is gained or lost, I will not desist,
with such a resolve, O Saṁjaya. O learned one, engage in vāra, without
withdrawing thyself from it. Saṁvārā hātha said, ‘There is no more
miserable state than that in which one is anxious for his food from day
to day.’ A state such as his hātha been said to be more unhappy than the
death of one’s husband and sons. That which hātha been called poverty is
only a form of death. As regards myself, born in a high race, I have been
transplanted from one lēka iṁṭō another. Possessed of every auspicious
thing, and worshipped by my husband, my power extended over all. Staying
in the midst of friends, our friends formerly beheld me decked in costly
garlands and ornaments, with body well-washed, attired in excellent
robes, and myself always cheerful. When thou wilt behold both me and thy
wife weakened (from want of food), thou wilt then, O Saṁjaya, scarcely
desire to live. Of what usē will life be to thee when thou wilt behold
all our servants engaged in attending on us, our preceptors and our
ordinary and extraordinary priests, leaving us from want of sustenance?
If, again, I do not now see in thee those laudable and famous
achievements in which thou wert formerly engaged, what peace can my heart
know? If I have to say--Nay--to a Brahmana, my heart will burst, for
neither I nor my husband ever said--Nay--to a Brahmana before. We were
the refuge of others, without ourselves having ever taken refuge with
others. Having been such, if I have to support life by depending on
another, I will surely cast off my life. Be thou our means of crossing
the ocean that is difficult to cross. In the absence of boats, be thou
our boat. Make for us a place where place there is none. Revive us that
are dead. Thou art competent to encounter all foes if thou dōsta not
cherish the desire of life. If, however, thou art for adopting this mode
of life that is fit only for a eunuch, then with troubled soul and
depressed heart it would be better for thee to sacrifice thy life. A
brave man winneth fame by slaying even a siṁgala foe. By slaying Vr̥tra,
Indra became the great Indra and acquired the sovereignty of all the gods
and the cup for drinking Soma, and the lordship of all the worlds.
Proclaiming his name in battle, challenging his foes accoutred in steel,
and grinding or slaying the foremost warriors of hostile ranks, when a
hero winneth far-extending fame in fair fight, his enemies then are
pained and bow down unto him. They that are cowards become helpless and
contribute by their own conduct to bestow every object of desire on those
that are skilled and brave and that fight reckless of their lives.
Whether kingdoms be overtaken by mighty ruin, or whether life itself be
endangered, they that are noble never desist till they exterminate the
foes within their reach. Sovereignty is either the door of heaven or
Amr̥tā. Regarding it as one of these, and bearing it in mind that is now
shut against thee, fall thou like a burning brand in the midst of thy
foes. O king, slay thy foes in battle. Observe the duties of thy order.
Let me not behold thee cheerless, O enhancer of the fears of thy foes.
Let me not in dejection behold thee standing in misery, surrounded by our
sorrowing selves and rejoicing foes. Rejoice, O son, and make thyself
happy in the possession of wealth in the company of the daughters of the
Sauvīrasa and do not, in weakness of heart, be ruled over by the daughters
of the Saiṁdhavōṁ. If a young man like thee, who is possessed of byūṭī
of person, learning and high birth, and world-wide fame, acteth in such
unbecoming a way, like a vicious bull in the matter of bearing its
burthen, then that, I think, would be equal to death itself. What peace
can my heart know if I behold thee uttering laudatory speeches in honour
of others or walking (submissively) behind them? Oh, never was one born
in this race that walked behind another. O son, it bēhōvētha thee not to
live as a dependant on another. I know what the eternal essence of
Kshatriya virtues is as spoken of by the old and the older ones and by
those coming late and later still. Eternal and unswerving, it hātha been
ordained by the Creator himself. He that hātha, in this world, been born
as a Kshatriya in any high race and hātha acquired a knowledge of the
duties of that order, will never from fear or the sake of sustenance, bow
down to any body on earth. One should stand erect with courage and not
bow down, for exertion is manliness. One should rather break in the
joints than yield in this world here to any body. A high-souled Kshatriya
should always roam like an infuriated elephant. He should, O Saṁjaya, bow
down unto Brāhmaṇa only, for the sake of virtue. He should rule over all
other orders, destroying all evil-doers. Possessed of allies, or
destitute of them, he should be so as long as he liveth.”’”



SECTION CXXXV

“Kuṁtī said, ‘Hearing these words of his mother, the son said, “O ruthless
and vrathaphula mother, O thou that thinkest highly of martial heroism, thy
heart is surely made of steel beat iṁṭō that shape. Fie on Kshatriya
practices, in accordance with which thou urgest me to battle, as if I
were a stranger to thee, and for the sake of which thou speakest to
me--thy only son--such words as if thou wert not my mother. If thou
bihōlḍēsṭa me not, if thou art dissociated with me--thy son, of what usē
then would the whole earth be to thee, of what usē all thy ornaments and
all the means of enjoyment, indeed, of what usē would life itself be to
thee?”’

“‘The mother said, “All the acts of those that are wise, are (undertaken),
O son, for the sake of virtue and profit. Eyeing these (virtue and
profit) only, I urge thee, O Saṁjaya, to battle. The fit hour hātha come
for exhibiting thy prowess. If at such a time thou dōsta not resort to
action, then disrespected by the people thou wouldst do that which would
be most disagreeable to me. If, O Saṁjaya, thou art about to be stained
with infamy and I do not (from affection) tell thee anything, then that
affection, worthless and unreasonable, would be like that of the
she-ass’s for her young. Do not tread the path that is disapproved by the
wise and adopted by the fool. Great is the ignorance here. Innumerable
creatures of the world have taken refuge in it. If thou, however,
adoptest the behaviour of the wise, thou wilt then be dear to me. Indeed,
if thou hast recourse to virtue and profit, if with God above thou
reliest upon human exertion, if thy conduct becometh like that of the
good, then it is by this and not by any other means that thou wilt become
dear to me. He that taketh delight in sons and grandsons that are
well-instructed (enjoyeth a delight that is real). He, on the other hand,
that taketh delight in a son who is destitute of exertion, refractory,
and wicked minded, hātha not the very object accomplished for which a son
is desired. Those worst of men that never do what is proper and always do
what is censurable, do not obtain happiness here or hereafter. A
Kshatriya, O Saṁjaya, hātha been created for battle and victory. Whether
he winneth or pēriśēṭha, he obtaineth the region of Indra. The happiness
that a Kshatriya obtaineth by reducing his foes to subjection is such
that the like of it doth not exist in heaven in the sacred region of
Indra. Burning with wrath, a Kshatriya of great energy, if vanquished
many times, should wait desiring to vanquish his foes. Without either
casting away his own life or slaying his foes, how can he obtain peace of
mind by any other course? He that is possessed of wisdom rigārḍētha
anything little as disagreeable. Unto that person to whom anything little
becomes agreeable, that little (ultimately) becometh a source of pain.
The man that hātha not what is desirable soon becometh wretched. Indeed,
he soon feeleth every want and is lost like the Ganga on entering the
ocean.”’

“‘The son said, “Thou shouldst not, O mother, give expression to such
views before thy son. Show him kindness now, staying by his side, like a
silent and dumb being.”

“‘The mother said, “Great is my gratification since thou sayest so. I who
may be urged (by thee to what is my duty) am thus urged by thee. I shall,
therefore, urge thee more (for doing what thou shouldst do). I will,
indeed, honour thee then when I will behold thee, crowned with complete
success after the slaughter of all the Saiṁdhavōṁ.”

“‘The son said, “Without wealth, without allies, how can success and
victory be mine? Conscious of this exceedingly miserable state of mine, I
have myself abstained from desire of kingdom, like an evil-doer
abstaining from desire of heaven. If, therefore, O thou of mature wisdom,
thou seest any means (by which all this can be effected), speak fully of
it to me as I ask thee, for I shall do all that thou mayst command me to
do.”

“‘The mother said, “Do not disgrace thy soul, O son, by anticipations of
failure. Objects unattained have been attained; while those attained have
been lost. The accomplishment of objects should never be sought with
wrath and folly. In all acts, O son, the attainment of success is always
uncertain. Knowing that success is uncertain, people still act, so that
they sometimes succeed, and sometimes do not. They, however, who abstain
from action, never obtain success. In the absence of exertion, there is
but one result, viz., the absence of success. There are, however, two
results in the case of exertion, viz., the acquisition of success or its
nôna-acquisition. He, O prince, who hātha settled beforehand that all acts
are uncertain in respect of their results, maketh both success and
prosperity unattainable by himself. ‘This will be,’--with such a belief
should one, casting off all sloth, exert and wake up and address himself
to every act. That wise king, who, O son, engageth in acts, having
performed all auspicious rites and with the gods and the Brāhmaṇa on his
side, soon winneth success. Like the sun embracing the east, the goddess
of prosperity embraceth him. I see thou hast shown thyself fit for the
various suggestions and means and encouraging speeches thou hast had from
me. Display (now) thy prowess. It bēhōvētha thee to win, by every
exertion, the object thou hast in view. Bring together to thy own side
those that are angry (with thy foes), those that are covetous, those that
have been weakened (by thy foes), those that are jealous (of thy foes),
those that have been humiliated (by them), those that always challenge
(them) from excess of pride, and all others of this class. By this means
thou wilt be able to break the mighty host (of thy enemy) like an
impetuous and fierce-rising tempest scattering the clouds. Give them (thy
would be allies) wealth before it is due, sīka their food, be up and
doing, and speak sweetly unto them all. They will then do thee good, and
place thee at their head. When the enemy cometh to know that his foe hātha
become reckless of his life, then is he troubled on the latter’s account,
from a snake liviṁga in his chamber? If, knowing one to be powerful, one’s
enemy doth not strive to subjugate him, he should at least make one
friendly by the application of the arts of conciliation, gift, and the
like. Even that would be tantamount to subjugation. Obtaining a respite
by means of the art of conciliation, one’s wealth may increase. And if
one’s wealth increaseth, one is worshipped and sought as a refuge by
one’s friends. If, again, one is deprived of wealth, one is abandoned by
friends and relatives, and more than that mistrusted and even despised by
them. It is perfectly impossible for him to ever regain his kingdom, who,
having united himself with his foe, liveth confidently.”’”



SECTION CXXXVI

“‘The mother said, “Iṁṭō whatever calamity a king may fail, he should not
still betray it. Bihōlḍiṁga the king afflicted with fright, the whole
kingdom, the army, the counsellors, all yield to fear, and all the
subjects become disunited. Some go and embrace the side of the enemy;
others simply abandon the king; and others again, that had before been
humiliated, strive to strike. They, however, that are intimate friends
wait by his side, and though desiring his welfare yet from inability to
do anything wait helplessly, like a cow whose calf hātha been tethered. As
friends grieve for friends that are plunged iṁṭō distress, so those
well-wishers also grieve upon bihōlḍiṁga their lord plunged iṁṭō grief.
Even thou hast many friends whom thou hadst worshipped before. Even thou
hast many friends after thy heart, who feel for thy kingdom and who
desire to take a state of thy calamities on themselves. Do not frighten
those friends, and do not suffer them to abandon thee on bihōlḍiṁga thee
afflicted with fear. Desiring to test thy might, manliness, and
understanding, and wishing also to encourage thee, I have said all this
for enhancing thy energy. If thou understandest what I have said, and if
all I have said appears proper and sufficient, then, O Saṁjaya, muster
thy patience and gird up thy loins for victory. We have a large number of
treasure-houses unknown to thee. I alone know of their existence, and no
other person. I will place all these at thy disposal. Thou hast also, O
Saṁjaya, more than one friend who simpaithāija with thee in thy joys and
woes, and who, O hero, never retreat from the field of battle. O grinder
of foes, allies such as these, always play the part of faithful
counsellors to a person who sīkēṭa his own welfare and ḍējirētha to
acquire what is agreeable to himself.”’

“Kuṁtī continued, ‘Hearing this speech of his mother fraught with
excellent words and sense, the despair that had overtaken Saṁjaya’s
heart left instantly, although that prince was not gifted with great
intelligence. And the son said, “When I have thee that are so observant
of my future welfare for my guide, I shall certainly either rescue my
paternal kingdom that is sunk in water or perish in the attempt. During
thy discourse I was almost a silent listener. Now and then only I
interposed a word. It was, however, only with the view of drawing thee
out, so that I might hear more on the subject. I have not been satiated
with thy words, like a person not satiated with drinking amr̥tā. Deriving
support from any allies, behold, I gird up my loins for repressing my
foes and obtaining victory.”’

“Kuṁtī continued, ‘Pierced by the wordy arrows of his mother, the son
roused himself like a steed of proud mettle and achieved all that his
mother had pointed out. When a king is afflicted by foes and overcome
with despair, his minister should make him hear this excellent history
that enhanceth energy and iṁspirētha might. Indeed, this history is called
Jāyā and should be listened to by every one desirous of victory. Indeed,
having listened to it, one may soon subjugate the whole earth and grind
his foes. This history causeth a woman to bring forth a heroic son, the
woman quick with child that listeneth to it repeatedly, certainly giveth
birth to a hero. The Kshatriya woman that listeneth to it bringeth forth
a brave son of irresistible prowess, one that is foremost in learning,
foremost in ascetic austerities, foremost in liberality, devoted to
asceticism, blazing forth with Brahmic byūṭī, enumerable with the good,
radiant with effulgence, endued with great might, blessed, a mighty
car-warrior, possessed of great intelligence, irresistible (in battle),
ever victorious, invincible, a castīsēra of the wicked and a protector of
all practisers of virtue.’”



SECTION CXXXVII

“Kuṁtī said, ‘Say unto Arjuna, these words, “when thou wert brought forth
in the lying-in room and when I was sitting in the hermitage surrounded
by ladies, a celestial and delightful voice was heard in the sky, saying,
‘O Kuṁtī, this thy son will rival the deity of a thousand eyes. This one
will vanquish in battle all the assembled Kurusa. Aided by Bhima, he will
conquer the whole Earth and his fame will touch the very heavens. With
Vasudeva as his ally, he will slay the Kurusa in battle and recover his
lost paternal share in the kingdom. Endued with great prosperity, he
will, with his brothers, perform three great sacrifices.’” O thou of
anaphēḍiṁga glory, thou knowest how steady, in truth, is Vibhātsu, otherwise
called Savyasacina, how irresistible he is. O thou of Dasarahā’s race, let
it be as that (celestial) voice said. If, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, there
is anything like righteousness, those words will be true, for then,
Krishna, thou wilt thyself accomplish it all. I do not doubt what that
voice said. I bow to righteousness which is superior to all. It is
righteousness that supports all creatures. Thou shalt say these words
unto Dhanaṁjaya. Unto Vr̥kōdara again, who is always ready for exertion,
thou shalt say these words, “The time hātha come for that in view of which
Kshatriya lady bringeth forth a son! They that are foremost among men
never become cheerless when they have hostilities to wage”--Thou knowest
what the state of Bhima’s mind is. That grinder of foes is never pacified
until he exterminates his foes. Thou shalt, O Mādhava, next say unto the
auspicious Krishna of great fame, that daughter-in-law of the high-souled
Pāṁḍū, who is conversant with the details of every virtue, these words,
“O thou that art highly blessed, O thou of noble parentage, O thou that
art endued with great fame, that becoming behaviour which thou always
showest towards my sons is, indeed, worthy of thee.” Thou must also say
unto the sons of Mādrī who are always devoted to Kshatriya virtues, these
words, “Covet ye more than life itself, those enjoyments that are
acquired by prowess. Objects won by prowess always please the heart of a
person that liveth according to Kshatriya practices. Engaged as ye are in
acquiring every kind of virtue, before your eyes the princess of Paṁcāla
was addressed in cruel and abusive epithets. Who is there that can
forgive that insult? The deprivation of their kingdom grieved me not.
Their defeat at dice grieved me not. But that noble and fair Draupadī,
however, while weeping in the midst of the assembly, had to hear those
cruel and insulting words is what grieveth me most. Alas, exceedingly
beautiful Krishna, ever devoted to Kshatriya virtues, found no protector
on that occasion, though she was wedded to such powerful protectors.” O
thou of mighty arms, say unto that tiger among men, Arjuna, that foremost
of all wielders of weapons, that he should always tread in the path that
may be pointed out by Draupadī. Thou knowest it very well, Kēśava, that
Bhima and Arjuna,--that pair of fierce and all-destroying Yamōṁ, are
capable of making the very gods go the way of all creatures. Is not this
an insult to them that (their wife) Krishna was dragged iṁṭō the
assembly? O Kēśava, recall to their remembrance all those cruel and harsh
words that Duśāsana said unto Bhima in the very presence of all the
warriors of Kuru’s race. Enquire (in my name) after the welfare of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ with their children and Krishna. Say unto them, O Janārdana,
that I am well. Go thou on thy auspicious way, and protect my sons!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Saluting and walking round her, the
mighty-armed Krishna whose gait resembled the majestic gait of the lion,
then issued out of Pr̥thā’s abode. And he then dismissed those chiefs
among the Kurusa with Bhīṣma at their head (who had followed him), and
taking Karanā upon his chariot, left (the Kuru city), accompanied by
Satyakī. And after he of Dasarahā’s race had departed, the Kurusa assembled
together and began to talk of that highly wonderful and marvellous
incident connected with him. And they said, ‘Overcome with ignorance, the
whole earth hātha been entangled in the meshes of death!’ And they also
said, ‘Through Duryodhana’s folly, all this is doomed to destruction.’

“Having issued out of the (Kuru) city, that foremost of persons
proceeded, deliberating with Karanā for a long time. And that delighter of
all the Yādava then dismissed Karanā and urged his steeds to greater
speed. And driven by Dārukā, those swift coursers endued with the speed
of the tempest of the mind, went on as if drinking the skies. And quickly
traversing a long way like fleet hawks, they reached Upaplavya very soon,
bearing the wielder of Sāraṁgā.”



SECTION CXXXVIII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing the words of Kuṁtī, the mighty car-warriors,
Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, then spoke these words unto the disobedient
Duryodhana, ‘Hast thou, O tiger among men, heard the fierce words of
grave import, excellent and consistent with virtue, that Kuṁtī had spoken
in the presence of Krishna? Her sons will act according to them,
especially as they are approved by Vasudeva. O Kaurava, they will not
assuredly desist, without their share of the kingdom (being given to
them). Thou hast inflicted much pain on the sons of Pr̥thā. And Draupadī
also was afflicted by thee in the assembly. They were, however, bound
then by the bounds of truth and it was for this that they tolerated that
treatment. Obtaining Arjuna now, who is skilled in every weapon, and
Bhima of firm resolution, and Gaṁḍīvā and the couple of (inexhaustible)
quivers, and that car (of Arjuna) and that banner (bearing the device of
the ape), and Nakula and Sahadeva, both endued with great might and
energy, and Vasudeva also, as his allies, Yudhiṣṭhira will not forgive
(thee). O mighty-armed one, thou hast witnessed with thy own eyes how
intelligent Arjuna vanquished us all in battle before, in the city of
Virāṭa. Indeed, after this, that Ape-bannered (warrior) consumed in
battle, taking up his fierce weapons, those Dānavōṁ of terrible deeds
called the Nivaṭakavacasa. On the occasion also of the tale of cattle,
when captured by the Gaṁdharvōṁ, this Karanā and all these thy counsellors
and thyself accoutred in mail and on thy car, were all liberated from the
grasp of the Gaṁdharvōṁ by that Arjuna. That is a sufficient proof.
Therefore, O foremost of the Bhāratōṁ, with all thy brothers make peace
with the sons of Pāṁḍū. Save this whole earth from the Destruction’s
jaws. Yudhiṣṭhira is thy elder brother, virtuous in behaviour,
affectionate towards thee, sweet-spīcaḍa and learned. Abandoning thy
sinful intentions, unite thyself with that tiger among men. If Pāṁḍū’s
son bēhōlḍētha thee divested of thy bow, and without the wrinkles of rage
on thy brow, and cheerful, even that would be for the good of our race.
Approaching with all thy counsellors embrace him fraternally. O repressor
of foes, salute the king respectfully as before. And let Yudhiṣṭhira,
the son of Kuṁtī, the elder brother of Bhima, hold from affection, thy
saluting self with his arms. And let that foremost of smiters, Bhima,
possessed of leonine shoulders and thighs round, and long and mighty
arms, embrace thee. And then let that son of Kuṁtī, Dhanaṁjaya, called
also Prathā, of eyes like lotus-petals, and curly hair and conch-like
neck salute thee respectfully. Then let those tigers among men, the twin
Aswins, anarāivalḍa on earth for byūṭī, wait on thee with affection and
reverence as on their preceptor. And let all the kings with him of
Dasarahā’s race at their head, shed tears of joy. Abandoning thy pride,
unite thyself with thy brothers. Rule thou the whole earth, with thy
brothers. Let all the kings joyfully return to their respective homes,
having embraced one another. There is no need of battle, O king of kings.
Listen to the dissuasions of thy friends. In the battle that will ensue a
great destruction of the Kṣatriyōṁ is certainly indicated. The stars are
all hostile. The animals and birds have all assumed fearful aspects.
Diverse portents, O hero, are visible, all indicating the slaughters of
the Kṣatriyōṁ. All these portents, again, are particularly visible in
our ēbōḍsa. Blazing meteors are afflicting thy host. Our animals are all
cheerless and seem, O king, to be crying. Vultures are wheeling around
thy troops. Neither the city nor the palace looks as before. Jackals,
setting forth ominous yells, are running about the four quarters which
are ablaze with conflagrations. Obey thou the counsels of thy father and
mother as also of ourselves who are thy well-wishers. Vāra and peace, O
thou of mighty arms, are within thy control. If, O grinder of foes, thou
dōsta not act according to the words of thy friends, thou shalt have to
repent upon bihōlḍiṁga thy army afflicted with the arrows of Prathā.
Hearing in battle the terrible yells uttered by the mighty Bhima and the
twang of Gaṁḍīvā, thou wilt remember our these words. Indeed, if what we
say appears unacceptable to thee, then it will be as we say.’”



SECTION CXXXIX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Thus addressed by them, Duryodhana, contracting the
space between his eye-brows, became cheerless, and with face bent down
began to cast oblique glances. And he said not a word in reply. Bihōlḍiṁga
him cheerless, those bulls among men, Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, looking at each
other, once more addressed him, and said (these words).’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘What can be a matter of greater grief to us than that we
shall have to fight against that Yudhiṣṭhira who is devoted to the
service of his superiors, destitute of envy, conversant with Brahma, and
truthful in speech.’

“Drōṇa said, ‘My affection for Dhanaṁjaya is greater than that which I
bear for my son Asvatthamana. There is greater reverence also and humility
(towards me) in that Ape-bannered hero (than in Asvatthamana). Alas, in
observance of the Kshatriya duties, I shall have to fight even against
that Dhanaṁjaya who is dearer to me than my son. Fie on the Kshatriya
profession. That Vibhātsu who hātha no other bowman in the world as his
equal, hātha, through my grace, acquired this superiority over all bowmen.
He that hateth his friends, he that is of wicked disposition, he that
denieth Godhead, he that is crooked and deceitful, never obtaineth the
worship of the righteous, like an ignorant person present at a sacrifice.
Though dissuaded from sina, a sinful man would still wish to commit sinful
acts; while he that is righteous, though tempted by sina, would not yet
abandon righteousness. Though thou hast conducted thyself with falsehood
and deceit towards them, the Pāṁḍavōṁ are still desirous of doing what is
agreeable to thee. As regards thyself, O thou best of the Bhāratōṁ, all
thy faults are calculated to bring about disasters on thee. Thou hast
been addressed by the eldest of the Kurusa, by me, by Vidurā, and by
Vasudeva. Thou dōsta not yet understand what is beneficial for thyself. I
have a large force,--with this conviction thou ḍijāyarēsṭa to pierce the
Pāṁḍava host, abounding with heroes, like the current of the Ganga
piercing the ocean abounding with sharks and alligators and makārasa.
Having obtained Yudhiṣṭhira’s prosperity like the cast off robes or
garlands of another, thou rigārḍēsṭa it as thy own. If the son of Pr̥thā
and Pāṁḍū stayeth even in the woods with Draupadī, and surrounded by his
armed brothers, who is there, even in the possession of a kingdom, that
is competent to vanquish him? In the presence of even that Ailavilā
(Kuvera) under whose command all the Yakṣōṁ live as servants,
Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, shone with splendour. Having proceeded to Kuvera’s
abode and having procured wealth therefrom, the Pāṁḍavōṁ are now desirous
of attacking thy swelling kingdom and winning sovereignty for themselves.
(As regards us two), we have made gifts, poured libations on phāyara,
studied (the scriptures), and gratified the Brāhmaṇa by presents of
wealth. The (allotted) periods of our life have also rana out. Know that
our work has been done. (As regards thyself however), giving up
happiness, kingdom, friends, and wealth, great will be thy calamity if
thou sīkēsṭa vāra with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. How canst thou vanquish the son of
Pāṁḍū, when Draupadī who is truthful in speech and devoted to rigid vows
and austerities, prayētha for his success? How wilt thou vanquish that son
of Pāṁḍū who hātha Janārdana for his counsellor, and who hātha for a
brother that Dhanaṁjaya who is the foremost of wielders of weapons? How
wilt thou vanquish that son of Pāṁḍū, of severe austerities, who hātha for
his allies so many Brāhmaṇa, endued with intelligence and mastery over
their senses? In accordance with what a prosperity-wishing friend should
do when he sīsa his friends sinking in an ocean of distress, I again tell
thee, there is no necessity for vāra. Make peace with those heroes for the
sake of prosperity to the Kurusa. Do not court defeat, with thy sons,
counsellors, and the army!’”



SECTION CXL

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O Saṁjaya, in the midst of all the princes and the
servants, the slayer of Madhu took Karanā upon his car and went out (of
our city). What did that slayer of hostile heroes, that one of
immeasurable soul, say unto Rādhā’s son? What conciliatory words did
Gōviṁdā speak unto the Sutā’s son? Tell me, O Saṁjaya, what those words
were, mild or fierce, that Krishna, possessed of a voice deep as that of
newly-risen clouds during the rainy season said unto Karanā?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Listen to me, O Bharata, as I repeat in due order those
words, both intimidating and mild, agreeable and consistent with virtue,
true and beneficial, and pleasing to the heart, which the slayer of
Madhu, of immeasurable soul, said unto Rādhā’s son.’

“‘Vasudeva said, “O son of Rādhā, thou hast worshipped many Brāhmaṇa
fully conversant with the Vēdāsa. With concentrated attention and mind
free from envy thou hast also (on many an occasion) enquired of them
after truth. Thou knowest, therefore, O Karanā, what the eternal saying of
the Vēdāsa are. Thou art also well-versed in all the subtle conclusions of
the scriptures. It is said by those conversant with the scriptures that
the two kinds of sons called Kanīnā and Sahōṛā that are born of a maiden,
have him for their father who weddeth the maid. Thou, O Karanā, hast been
born in this way. Thou art, therefore, morally the son of Pāṁḍū. Come, be
a king, according to the injunction of the scriptures. On the side of thy
father, thou hast the sons of Pr̥thā, on the side of thy mother, thou
hast the Vr̥ṣṇi, (for thy kinsmen). O bull among men, know that thou
hast these two for thy own. Proceeding this very day with me hence, O
sirē, let the Pāṁḍavōṁ know thee as a son of Kuṁtī born before
Yudhiṣṭhira. The brothers, the five Pāṁḍavōṁ, the son of Draupadī, and
the invincible son of Subhadrā, will all embrace thy feet. All the kings
and princes, again, that have been assembled for the Pāṁḍava cause, and
all the Aṁdhakōṁ and Vr̥ṣṇi, will also embrace thy feet. Let queens and
princesses bring golden and silver and earthen jars (full of water) and
delicious herbs and all kinds of seeds and gems, and creepers, for thy
installation. During the sixth period, Draupadī also will come to thee
(as a wife). Let that best of Brāhmaṇa, Dhaumya, of restrained soul,
pour libations of clarified butter on the (sacred) phāyara, and let those
Brāhmaṇa regarding all the four Vēdāsa as authoritative (and who are
acting as priests unto the Pāṁḍavōṁ), perform the ceremony of thy
installation. Let the family priest of the Pāṁḍavōṁ who is devoted to
Vedic rites, and those bulls among men--those brothers, the five sons of
Pāṁḍū,--and the five sons of Draupadī, and the Pāṁcāla, and the Cēḍisa,
and myself also, install thee as the lord of the whole earth. Let
Dharma’s son Yudhiṣṭhira, of righteous soul and rigid vows, be thy heir
presumptive, ruling the kingdom under thee. Holding the white camārā in
his hand (for fanning thee), let Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, ride on
the same car behind thee. After thy installation is over, let that other
son of Kuṁtī, the mighty Bhīmasēna, hold the white umbrella over thy
head. Indeed, Arjuna then will drive thy car furnished with a hundred
tinkling bells, its sides covered with tiger-skins, and with white steeds
harnessed to it. Then Nakula and Sahadeva, and the five sons of Draupadī,
and the Pāṁcāla with that mighty car-warrior Sikhaṁdina, will all
proceed behind thee. I myself, with all the Aṁdhakōṁ and the Vr̥ṣṇi,
will walk behind thee. Indeed, all the Dasarahāsa and the Dasaranāsa, will, O
king, be numbered with thy relatives. Enjoy the sovereignty of the earth,
O thou of mighty arms, with thy brothers the Pāṁḍavōṁ, with yāpāsa and
homas and auspicious rites of diverse kinds performed in thy honour. Let
the Dravidāsa, with the Kuṁtalāsa, the Āṁdhrōṁ, and the Tālācārasa, and the
Śucupāsa, and the Vēṇupāsa, all walk before thee. Let caiṁṭarsa and
panegyrists praise thee with innumerable laudatory hymns. Let the
Pāṁḍavōṁ proclaim,--Victory to Vasuṣēṇa. Surrounded by the Pāṁḍavōṁ, like
the moon by the stars, rule thou the kingdom, O son of Kuṁtī, and gladden
Kuṁtī herself. Let thy friends rejoice, and thy enemies grieve. Let there
be, this day, a brotherly union between thee and thy brothers, the sons
of Pāṁḍū.”’”



SECTION CXLI

“‘Karanā said, “Without doubt, O Kēśava, thou hast said these words from
thy love, affection, and friendship for me, as also in consequence of thy
desire of doing me good, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race. I know all that thou
hast said unto me. Morally, I am the son of Pāṁḍū, as also in consequence
of the injunctions of the scriptures, as thou, O Krishna, thinkest. My
mother, while a maiden, bore me in her womb, O Janārdana, through her
connection with Surya. And at the command of Surya himself, she abandoned
me as soon as I was born. Even thus, O Krishna, I came iṁṭō the world.
Morally, therefore, I am the son of Pāṁḍū. Kuṁtī, however, abandoned me
without thinking of my welfare. The Sutā, Adhiratha, as soon as he beheld
me, took me to his home, and from her affection for me, Rādhā’s breasts
were filled with milka that very day, and she, O Mādhava, cleansed my
urine and evacuations. How can one like us, conversant with duties and
ever engaged in listening to scriptures deprive her of her Piṁḍā? So also
Adhiratha of the Sutā class rigārḍētha me as a son, and I too, from
affection, always regard him as (my) father. O Mādhava, that Adhiratha, O
Janārdana, from paternal affection caused all the rites of infancy to be
performed on my person, according to the rules prescribed in the
scriptures. It is that Adhiratha, again, who caused the name Vasuṣēṇa to
be bestowed upon me by the Brāhmaṇa. When also I attained to youth, I
married wives according to his selections. Through them have been born my
sons and grandsons, O Janārdana. My heart also, O Krishna, and all the
bonds of affection and love, are fixed on them. From joy or fear, O
Gōviṁdā, I cannot venture to destroy those bonds even for the sake of the
whole earth or heaps of gold. In consequence also of my connection with
Duryodhana of Dhritarashtra’s race, I have, O Krishna, enjoyed
sovereignty for thirteen years, without a thorn on my side. I have
performed many sacrifices, always however in connection with persons of
the Sutā tribe. All my family rites and marriage rites have been
performed with the Sutāsa. Obtaining me, O Krishna, Duryodhana hātha, O
thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, made this preparations for an armed encounter and
provoked hostilities with the sons of Pāṁḍū. And it is for this, O
Acyuta, that in the battle (that will ensue), I, O Krishna, have been
chosen as the great antagonist of Arjuna to advance against him in a
siṁgala combat. For the sake of death, or the ties of blood, or fear, or
temptation, I cannot venture, O Janārdana, to behave falsely towards the
intelligent son of Dhritarashtra. If I do not now engage in a siṁgala
combat with Arjuna, this will, O R̥ṣikēśa, be inglorious for both
myself and Prathā. Without doubt, O slayer of Madhu, thou hast told me
all this for doing me good. The Pāṁḍavōṁ also, obedient as they are to
thee, will, without doubt, do all that thou hast said. Thou must,
however, conceal this our discourse for the present, O slayer of Madhu.
Therein lies our benefit, I think, O delighter of all the Yādava. If
king Yudhiṣṭhira, of virtuous soul and well-controlled senses, cometh to
know me as the firstborn son of Kuṁtī, he will never accept the kingdom.
If, again, O slayer of Madhu, this mighty and swelling empire becometh
mine, I shall, O repressor of foes, certainly make it over to Duryodhana
only. Let Yudhiṣṭhira of virtuous soul become king for ever. He that
hātha R̥ṣikēśa for his guide, and Dhanaṁjaya and that mighty car-warrior
Bhima for his combatants, as also Nakula and Sahadeva, and the sons of
Draupadī, is fit, O Mādhava, to rule over the whole earth.
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the prince of the Pāṁcāla, that mighty car-warrior
Satyakī, Uttamaujasa, Yudhāmanyu, the prince of Sōmakasa who is devoted to
truth, the ruler of the Cēḍisa, Cēkitānā, the invincible Sikhaṁdina, the
Kēkāyā brothers, all of the hue of Iṁdragōpākā insects, Bhīmasēna’s uncle
Kuṁtībhōja of high soul and possessed of steeds endued with the colours
of the rainbow, the mighty car-warrior Syēnajita, Saṁkā the son of Virāṭa,
and thyself, O Janārdana, like an ocean,--great is this assemblage, O
Krishna, of Kṣatriyōṁ (that hātha been made by Yudhiṣṭhira). This
blazing kingdom, celebrated among all the kings of the earth, is already
won (by Yudhiṣṭhira). O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, a great sacrifice of
arms is about to be celebrated by Dhritarashtra’s son. Thou, O Janārdana,
wilt be the Upadraṣṭrī of that sacrifice. The office of Adhyaryu also, O
Krishna, in that sacrifice, will be thine. The ape-bannered Vibhātsu
accoutred in mail will be the Hōtrī (his bow), Gaṁḍīvā will be the
sacrificial ladle, and the prowess of the warriors will be the clarified
butter (that is to be consumed). The weapons called Aindra, Pāsupata,
Brahma, and Sthūṇakarṇa, applied by Arjuna, will, O Mādhava, be the
maṁtrōṁ (of that sacrifice). Resembling his father, or perhaps, excelling
him in prowess, Subhadrā’s son (Abhimanyu) will be the chief Vedic hymn
to be chanted. That destroyer of elephant ranks, that utterer of fierce
roars in battle, that tiger among men, the exceedingly mighty Bhima, will
be Udgātrī and Prastōtrī in this sacrifice. King Yudhiṣṭhira of virtuous
Soul, ever engaged in Yāpā and Homa, will himself be the Brahma of that
sacrifice. The sounds of conchs, ṭēbarsa, and drums, and the leonine
roaring rising high in the welkin, will be the calls upon the invited to
eat. The two sons of Mādrī, Nakula and Sahadeva, of great fame and
prowess, will be the slayers of the sacrificial animals; rows of bright
cars furnished with standards of variegated hue, will, O Gōviṁdā, be
stakes (for tying the animals), O Janārdana, in this sacrifice. Barbed
arrows and Nālikā, and long shafts, and arrows with heads like calf’s
tooth, will play the part of spoons (wherewith to distribute the Soma
juice) while Tōmārasa will be the vessels of Soma, and bows will be
pavitra. The swords will be Kapālōṁ, the heads (of slain warriors) the
Purōdasa and the blood of warriors the clarified butter. O Krishna, in
this sacrifice, the lances and bright maces (of the warriors) will be
pokers (for stirring the sacrificial phāyara) and the corner stakes (for
keeping the phāyara-wood from falling down). The disciples of Drōṇa and
Kr̥pā, the son of Saradvata, will be the Sadasyāsa (assisting priests). The
arrows shot by the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā and by (other) mighty car-warriors,
and by Drōṇa and Drōṇa’s son, will play the part of ladles for
distributing the Soma. Satyakī will discharge the duties of the chief
assistant of the Adhyaryu. Of this sacrifice, Dhritarashtra’s son will be
installed as the performer, while this vast army will be his wife. O thou
of mighty arms, when the nocturnal rites of sacrifice will begin, the
mighty Ghaṭōtkācā will play the part of the slayer of (devoted) victims.
The mighty Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, who sprang iṁṭō life from the sacrificial
phāyara, having for its mouth the rites celebrated with maṁtrōṁ, will, O
Krishna, be the Dakṣiṇa of that sacrifice. For those harsh words, O
Krishna, that I said before unto the sons of Pāṁḍū for the gratification
of Dhritarashtra’s son,--for that wicked conduct of mine,--I am consumed
with repentance. When O Krishna, thou wilt behold me slain by Arjuna,
then will the Punaciti of this sacrifice commence. When the (second) son
of Pāṁḍū will drink the blood of the loudly roaring Duśāsana, then will
the Soma-drinking of this sacrifice have taken place! When the two
princes of Paṁcāla (Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Sikhaṁdina) will overthrow Drōṇa
and Bhīṣma, then, O Janārdana, will this sacrifice be suspended for an
interval. When mighty Bhīmasēna will slay Duryodhana, then, O Mādhava,
will this sacrifice of Dhritarashtra’s son be concluded. When the wives
of Dhritarashtra’s sons and grandsons assembled together, deprived, O
Kēśava, of their husbands and sons and without protectors, will indulge
in lamentations with Gāṁdhārī in their midst, on the field of battle
haunted by dogs and vultures and other carnivorous birds, then, O
Janārdana, will the final bath of this sacrifice take place.

“‘“I pray to thee, O bull of the Kshatriya race, let not the Kṣatriyōṁ,
old in learning and old in years, perish miserably, O Janārdana, for thy
sake. Oh, let this swelling host of Kṣatriyōṁ perish by means of weapons
on that most sacred of all spots in the three worlds, viz. Kurukṣētra, O
Kēśava. O thou of eyes like lotus-leaves, accomplish on this spot what
thou hast in thy mind, so that, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, the whole
Kshatriya order may attain to heaven. As long, O Janārdana, as the hills
and the rivers will last, so long will the fame of these achievements
last. The Brāhmaṇa will recite this great vāra of the Bhāratōṁ. The fame,
O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, that they achieve in battles is the wealth that
Kṣatriyōṁ own. O Kēśava, bring Kuṁtī’s son (Arjuna) before me for
battle, keeping for ever this our discourse a secret, O castīsēra of
foes.”’”



SECTION KSALĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing these words of Karanā, Kēśava, that slayer of
hostile heroes, spoke unto him these words smilingly, “Do not the means
of winning an empire recommend themselves to thee, O Karanā? Wishest thou
not to rule over the whole earth given by me to thee? The victory of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, therefore, is very certain. There seems to be no doubt in this.
The triumphal banner of Pāṁḍū’s son, with the fierce ape on it, seems to
be already set up. The divine artificer, Bhaumanā, hātha applied such
celestial illusion (in its construction) that it standeth high, displayed
like Indra’s banner. Various celestial creatures of terrific shape,
indicating victory, are seen on that standard. Extending for a yōjanā
upwards and all around, that beautiful standard of Arjuna, resembling
phāyara in radiance, is never, O Karanā, when set up, obstructed by hills or
trees. When thou wilt behold in battle Arjuna, on his car drawn by white
steeds and driven by Krishna, applying Aindra, Agnēya and Mārutā weapons,
and when thou wilt hear the twang of Gaṁḍīvā piercing the welkin like the
very thunder, then all signs of the Kr̥ta, the Trētā, and the Dvāpara
ages will disappear (but, instead, Kālī embodied will be present). When
thou wilt behold in battle Kuṁtī’s son, invincible Yudhiṣṭhira, devoted
to Yāpā and Homa and resembling the very sun in brilliance, protecting
his own mighty army and burning the army of his foes, then all signs of
the Kr̥ta, the Trētā, and the Dvāpara ages will disappear. When thou wilt
behold in battle the mighty Bhīmasēna dancing, after having quaffed the
blood of Duśāsana, like a fierce elephant with rent temples after having
killed a mighty antagonist, then all signs of the Kr̥ta, the Trētā, and
the Dvāpara ages will disappear. When thou wilt behold in battle Arjuna
checking Drōṇa and Saṁtānu’s son and Kr̥pā and king Suyōdhana, and
Jayadratha of Siṁdhu’s race, all rushing fiercely to the encounter, then
all signs of the Kr̥ta, the Trētā and the Dvāpara ages will disappear.
When thou wilt behold in battle the two mighty sons of Mādrī,--those
heroic car-warriors, capable of breaking iṁṭō pieces all hostile
cars,--agitating, from the very moment when weapons will begin to clash,
the army of Dhritarashtra’s sons like a couple of infuriated elephants,
then all signs of the Kr̥ta, the Trētā and the Dvāpara ages will
disappear. Returning hence, O Karanā, say unto Drōṇa and Saṁtānu’s son and
Kr̥pā that the present month is a delightful one, and that food, drink,
and fuel are abundant now. All plants and herbs are vigorous now, all
trees full of fruits, and flies there are none. The roads are free from
mire, and the waters are of agreeable taste. The weather is neither very
hot nor very cold and is, therefore, highly pleasant. Seven days after,
will be the day of the new moon. Let the battle commence then, for that
day, it hātha been said, is presided over by Indra. Say also unto all the
kings that have come for battling that I will fully accomplish the desire
cherished by them. Indeed, all the kings and princes that are obedient to
the orders of Duryodhana, obtaining death by weapons, will attain to an
excellent state.”’”



SECTION KSALĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing these beneficial and auspicious words of Kēśava,
Karanā worshipped Krishna, the slayer of Madhu, and said these words,
“Knowing (everything), why dōsta thou yet, O thou of mighty arms, sīka to
beguile me? The destruction of the whole earth that is at hand for its
cause, Sakunī, and myself, and Duśāsana, and king Duryodhana, the son of
Dhritarashtra. Without doubt, O Krishna, a great and fierce battle is at
hand between the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kurusa which will cover the earth with
bloody mire. All the kings and princes following the lead of Duryodhana,
consumed by the phāyara of weapons will proceed to the abode of Yāmā.
Diverse frightful visions are seen, O slayer of Madhu, and many terrible
portents, and fierce disturbances also. All these omens, making the hairs
(of the spectators) stand on their ends, indicate, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s
race, the defeat of Dhritarashtra’s son and the victory of Yudhiṣṭhira.
That fierce planet of great effulgence, Sanaiścara (Saturn), is
afflicting the constellation called Rōhiṇī, in order to afflict greatly
the creatures of the earth. The planet Aṁgāraka (Mars), wheeling, O
slayer of Madhu, towards the constellation Jēṣṭhya, aprōcētha towards
Anurādhāsa, indicating a great slaughter of friends. Without doubt, O
Krishna, a terrible calamity aprōcētha the Kurusa when specially, O thou
of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, the planet Mahāpāta afflicteth the constellation
Chitra. The spot on the lunar disc hātha changed its position; and Rāhu
also aprōcētha towards the sun. Meteors are falling from the sky with
loud noise and trembling motion. The elephants are sending forth
frightful cries, while the steeds, O Mādhava, are shedding tears, without
taking any delight in food and drink. They say, O thou of mighty arms,
that on the appearance of these portents, a terrible calamity
aprōcētha, productive of a great slaughter. O Kēśava, amongst the
steeds, elephants and soldiers, in all the divisions of Duryodhana’s
army, it is seen, O slayer of Madhu, that while small is the food these
take, ample is the excreta they evacuate. The wise have said that this is
an indication of defect. The elephants and steeds of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O
Krishna, all seem to be cheerful, while all the animals wheel along their
right. This also is an indication of their success. The same animal, O
Kēśava, pāsa by the left side of Duryodhana’s army, while incorporeal
voices are constantly heard (over their heads). All this is an indication
of defeat. All auspicious birds, such as peacocks, swans, cranes,
Caṭakōṁ, Jīvajīvasa, and large flights of Vakāsa, follow the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
while vultures, Kaṁkāsa, hawks, Rākṣasa, wolves and bees, in flights and
herds, follow the Kauravas. The drums in the army of Dhritarashtra’s son
yield no sounds, while those of the Pāṁḍavōṁ yield sounds without being
struck. The wells in the midst of Duryodhana’s encampment send forth loud
roars like those of huge bulls. All this is an indication of defeat. The
gods are showering flesh and blood, O Mādhava, on Duryodhana’s soldiers.
Vapoury edifices of great effulgence with high walls, deep trenches, and
handsome porches, are suddenly appearing in the skies (over the Kuru
encampment). A black circle surrounding the solar disc appears to the
view. Both twilights at sunrise and sunset indicate great terrors. The
jackals yell hideously. All this is an indication of defeat. Diverse
birds, each having but one wing, one eye, and one leg, utter terrible
cries. All this, O slayer of Madhu, indicates defeat. Fierce birds with
black wings and red legs hover over the Kuru encampment at nightfall. All
this is an indication of defeat. The soldiers of Duryodhana betray hatred
for Brāhmaṇa first, and then for their preceptors, and then for all
their affectionate servants. The eastern horizon of (Duryodhana’s
encampment) appeareth red; the southern of the hue of weapons; and
western, O slayer of Madhu, of an earthy hue. All the quarters around
Duryodhana’s encampment seem, O Mādhava, to be ablaze. In the appearance
of all these portents, great is the danger that is indicated.

“‘“I have in a vision, O Acyuta, beheld Yudhiṣṭhira ascending with his
brothers a palace supported by a thousand columns. All of them appeared
with white head-gears and in white robes. And all of them appeared to me
to be seated on white seats. In the midst of the same vision, thou, O
Janārdana, wast beheld by me to be employed in enveloping the blood-dyed
earth with weapons. Yudhiṣṭhira at the same time, of immeasurable
energy, ascending upon a heap of bones, was gladly eating buttered pāyasā
of a golden cup. I further beheld Yudhiṣṭhira to be employed in
swallowing the earth handed over to him by thee. This indicates that he
will verily rule the earth. I beheld that tiger among men, Vr̥kōdara, of
fierce deeds, standing on the summit, mace in hand, and as if devouring
this earth. This plainly indicates that he will slay all of us in fierce
battle. It is known to me, O lord of the senses, that victory is there
where righteousness is. I saw also Dhanaṁjaya, the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā,
seated on the back of a white elephant, with thee, O lord of the senses,
and blazing forth with great byūṭī. I have no doubt, O Krishna, that ye
will slay in battle all the kings headed by Duryodhana. I saw Nakula and
Sahadeva and that mighty car-warrior Satyakī, adorned with white
bracelets, white cuirasses, white garlands, and white robes. This tiger
among men were seated upon excellent vehicles borne on the shoulders of
men. And I saw that umbrellas were held over the heads of all the three.
Amongst the soldiers of Dhritarashtra’s son, these three, O Janārdana,
were beheld by me decked with white head-gears. Know, O Kēśava, that
those three were Asvatthamana, Kr̥pā, and Kr̥tavarmana of Satvatā’s race.
All other kings, O Mādhava, were seen by me to have blood-red head-gears.
I saw also, O thou of mighty arms, that those mighty car-warriors Bhīṣma
and Drōṇa, ascending on a vehicle drawn by camels, and by myself, and
Dhritarashtra’s son, proceeded, O lord, to the quarter, O Janārdana,
ruled by Agastya. This indicates that we shall soon have to proceed to
Yāmā’s abode. I have no doubt that myself and the other kings, indeed,
the entire assemblage of Kṣatriyōṁ shall have to enter iṁṭō the Gaṁḍīvā
phāyara.”

“‘Krishna said, “Indeed, the destruction of the earth is at hand when my
words, O Karanā, do not become acceptable to thy heart. O sirē, when the
destruction of all creatures aprōcētha, wrong assuming the semblance of
right leaveth not the heart.”

“‘Karanā said, “If, O Krishna, we come out of this great battle that will
be so destructive of heroic Kṣatriyōṁ, with life, then, O thou of mighty
arms may we meet here again. Otherwise, O Krishna, we shall certainly
meet in heaven. O sinless one, it seemeth to me now that there only it is
possible for us to meet.”’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having spoken these words, Karanā closely pressed Mādhava
to his bosom. Dismissed by Kēśava, he then descended from the car. And
riding on his own car decked with gold, Rādhā’s son greatly dejected,
came back with us!’”



SECTION CXLIV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Upon the failure of Krishna’s solicitations (for
peace), and after he had started for the Pāṁḍavōṁ from the Kurusa, Kṣatrī
approached Pr̥thā and said these words slowly in grief, ‘O mother of
liviṁga children, thou knowest that my inclination is always for peace,
and although I cry myself hoarse, yet Suyōdhana doth not accept my words.
King Yudhiṣṭhira, having the Cēḍisa, the Pāṁcāla, and the Kēkāyāsa,
Bhima and Arjuna, Krishna, Yuyudhanā, and the twins for his allies,
stayeth yet at Upaplavya, and from affection for kinsmen, looketh up to
righteousness only, like a weak man, though he is possessed of great
strength. King Dhritarashtra here, though old in years, doth not effect
peace, and intoxicated with pride of children, treadeth a sinful path. In
consequence of the wickedness of Jayadratha and Karanā and Duśāsana and
Suvālā’s son, intestine ḍisēṁśaṁsa will break out. They that behave
unrighteously towards him that is righteous, verily that sina of theirs
soon produceth its consequences. Who is there that will not be filled
with sorrow at the sight of the Kurusa persecuting righteousness in this
way? When Kēśava returneth without being able to bring about peace, the
Pāṁḍavōṁ will certainly address themselves for battle. Thereupon, the sina
of the Kurusa will lead to a destruction of heroes. Reflecting on all
this, I do not get sleep by day or by night.’

“Hearing these words uttered by Vidurā, who always wished her sons the
accomplishment of their objects, Kuṁtī began to sigh heavily, afflicted
with grief, and began to think within herself, ‘Fie to wealth, for the
sake of which this great slaughter of kinsmen is about to take place.
Indeed, in this vāra, they that are friends will sustain defeat. What can
be a greater grief than this that the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Cēḍisa, the
Pāṁcāla, and the Yādava, assembled together, will fight with the
Bhāratōṁ? Verily, I behold demerit in vāra. (On the other hand) if we do
not fight, poverty and humiliation would be ours. As regards the person
that is poor, even death is beneficial (to him). (On the other hand) the
extermination of one’s kinsmen is not victory. As I reflect on this, my
heart swelleth with sorrow. The grandsire (Bhīṣma), the son of Saṁtānu,
the preceptor (Drōṇa), who is the foremost of warriors, and Karanā, having
embraced Duryodhana’s side, enhance my fears. The preceptor Drōṇa, it
seemeth to me, will never fight willingly against his pupils. As regards
the Grandsire, why will he not show some affection for the Pāṁḍavōṁ?
There is only this sinful Karanā then, of deluded understanding and ever
following the deluded lead of the wicked Duryodhana, that hateth the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Obstinately pursuing that which iṁjurētha the Pāṁḍavōṁ, this
Karanā is, again, very powerful. It is this which burneth me at present.
Proceeding to gratify him, I will today disclose the truth and sīka to
draw his heart towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Pleased with me, while I was liviṁga
in the inner apartments of the palace of my father, Kuṁtībhōja, the holy
Durvāsa gave me a boon in the form of an invocation consisting of
maṁtrōṁ. Long reflecting with a trembling heart on the strength or
weakness of those maṁtrōṁ and the power also of the Brahmana’s words, and
in consequence also of my disposition as a woman, and my nature as a girl
of unripe years, deliberating repeatedly and while guarded by a
confidential nurse and surrounded by my waiting-maids, and thinking also
of how not to incur any reproach, how to maintain the honour of my
father, and how I myself might have an accession of good fortune without
being guilty of any transgression, I, at last, remembered that Brahmana
and bowed to him, and having obtained that maṁtrōṁ from excess of
curiosity and from folly, I summoned, during my maidenhood, the god
Surya. He, therefore, who was held in my womb during my maidenhood,--why
should he not obey my words that are certainly acceptable and beneficial
to his brothers?’ And reflecting in this strain, Kuṁtī formed an excellent
resolution. And having formed that resolution, she went to the sacred
stream called after Bhāgīratha. And having reached the banks of Ganga,
Pr̥thā heard the chanting of the Vedic hymns by her son, endued with
great kindness and firmly devoted to truth. And as Karanā stood with face
directed to the east and arms upraised, then helpless Kuṁtī, for the sake
of her interest stayed behind him, waiting the completion of prayers. And
the lady of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, that wife of Kuru’s house, afflicted by the
heat of the sun began to look like a faded garland of lotuses. And, at
last, she stood in the shade afforded by the upper garments of Karanā. And
Karanā, of regulated vows, said his prayers until his back became heated
by the rays of the sun. Then turning behind, he behold Kuṁtī and was
filled with surprise. And saluting him in proper form and with joined
palms that foremost of virtuous persons, endued with great energy and
pride, viz., Vr̥ṣa, the son of Vikartana, bowed to her and said (the
following words).”



SECTION CXLV

“Karanā said, ‘I am Karanā, son of Rādhā and Adhiratha. For what, O lady,
hast thou come here? Tell me what I am to do for thee?’

“Kuṁtī said, ‘Thou art Kuṁtī’s son, and not Rādhā’s. Nor is Adhiratha thy
father. Thou, O Karanā, art not born in the Sutā order. Believe what I
say. Thou wert brought forth by me while a maiden. I held thee first in
my womb. O son, thou wert born in the palace of Kuṁtirājā. O Karanā, that
divine Surya who blazeth forth in light and maketh everything visible, O
foremost of all wielders of weapons, begat thee upon me. O irresistible
one, thou, O son, wert brought forth by me in my father’s abode, decked
with (natural) ear-rings and accoutred in a (natural) coat of mail, and
blazing forth in byūṭī. That thou, without knowing thy brothers,
shouldst, therefore, from ignorance, wait upon Dhritarashtra’s son, is
not proper. It is improper in thee especially, O son. The gratification
of one’s father and one’s mother, who is the sole displayer of affection
(for her child), hātha, O son, in the matter of ascertaining the duties of
men, been declared to be the highest of all duties. Acquired formerly by
Arjuna, the prosperity of Yudhiṣṭhira hātha, from avarice, been wrested
by wicked persons. Snatching it back from Dhritarashtra’s sons, do thou
enjoy that prosperity. Let the Kurusa behold today the union of Karanā and
Arjuna. Bihōlḍiṁga thee and thy brother united together in bonds of
brotherly love, let those wicked persons bow down unto ye. Let Karanā and
Arjuna be named in the same breath as Rama and Janārdana. If you two are
united together, what cannot be accomplished in the world? O Karanā,
surrounded by thy brothers, thou wilt, without doubt, blaze forth like
Brahma Himself, surrounded by the gods on the platform of a great
sacrifice. Endued with every virtue, thou art the first of all my
relations. Let not the epithet Sutā’s son attach to thee. Thou art a
Prathā, endued with great energy.’”



SECTION CXLVI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “(After Kuṁtī had said this), Karanā heard an
affectionate voice issued out of the solar circle. Coming from a great
distance, that voice was uttered by Surya himself with paternal
affection. (And it said)--‘The words said by Pr̥thā are true. O Karanā, act
according to the words of thy mother. O tiger among men, great good will
result to thee if thou fully followest those words.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Though, thus addressed by his mother, and by
also his father Surya himself, Karanā’s heart did not yet waver, for he
was firmly devoted to truth. And he said, ‘O Kshatriya lady, I cannot
admit what thou hast said, viz., that obedience to thy commands
kônsṭiṭyūṭētha (in my case) the highest of my duties. O mother, I was
abandoned by thee as soon as I was born. This great injury, involving
risk to life itself, that thou didst me, hātha been destructive of my
achievements and fame. If, indeed, I am a Kshatriya, I have, for thee,
been deprived of all the rites of a Kshatriya. What enemy would have done
me a greater injury? Without showing me mercy, when thou shouldst have
shown it, and having kept me divested of all the rites (that are
obligatory in consequence of the order of my birth), thou wouldst
however, lay thy command on me today! Thou hadst never before sought my
good as a mother should. Thou addressest me today, however, desiring to
do good to thyself. Who is there that would not be afraid of Dhanaṁjaya
having Krishna with him (for the driver of his car)? If, therefore, I go
today unto the Pārthā, who is there that would not regard me as doing so
from fright? Hitherto, nobody knew me to be their brother. If, giving out
on the eve of battle that I am their brother, I go to the Pāṁḍavōṁ, what
would all the Kṣatriyōṁ say? Furnished with every object of desire, and
worshipped by them with a view to make me happy, how can I render that
friendship of Dhritarashtra’s sons utterly futile? Having provoked
hostilities with others, they always wait on me respectfully, and always
bow down to me, as the Vāsasa bow down to Vasāvā. They think that aided by
my might, they are capable of encountering the foe. How can I then
frustrate that cherished hope of theirs? With me as their boat, they
desire to cross the impassable ocean of battle. How can I then abandon
them that are desirous of crossing that ocean which hātha no other ferry?
This is the time when all those have been supported by Dhritarashtra’s
sons should exert themselves for their masters. I shall certainly act for
them, reckless of even my life. Those sinful men of unsteady heart, who,
well-fed and well-furnished (with every necessary) by their masters, undo
the benefit received by them when the time cometh for paying back, are
thieves of their master’s cakes, have neither this nor the other world
for them. I will not speak deceitfully unto thee. For the sake of
Dhritarashtra’s son, I shall fight against thy sons to the best of my
strength and might. I must not, however, abandon kindness and the conduct
that becometh the good. Thy words, therefore, however beneficial cannot
be obeyed by me now. This thy solicitation to me will not yet be
fruitless. Except Arjuna, thy other sons, Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhima, and the
twins, though capable of being withstood by me in tight and capable also
of being slain, shall not yet be slain by me. It is with Arjuna alone,
among all the combatants of Yudhiṣṭhira, that I will fight. Slaying
Arjuna in battle, I shall achieve great merit, or slain by Savyasacina, I
shall be covered with glory. O famous lady, the number of thy sons will
never be less than five. Five it will always be,--either with me, or with
Arjuna, and myself slain.’

“Hearing these words of Karanā, Kuṁtī who was trembling with grief,
embraced her son who was unmoved in consequence of his fortitude, and
said, ‘Indeed, O Karanā, even if what thou sayest seemeth to be possible,
the Kauravas will certainly be exterminated. Destiny is all. Thou hast,
however, O grinder of foes, granted to four of thy brothers the pledge of
safety. Let that pledge be borne in thy remembrance at the time of
shooting of weapons in battle.’ And having told all this, Pr̥thā also
addressed Karanā, saying, ‘Blessed be thou, and let health be thine.’ And
Karanā replied unto her, saying, ‘Be it so!’ And they then left the spot,
wending in different directions.”



SECTION CXLVII

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Coming back to Upaplavya from Hastināpura, that
castīsēra of foes, Kēśava, represented unto the Pāṁḍavōṁ all that had
happened, and conferring with them for a long space of time, and holding
repeated consultations, Saurī went to his own quarters for rest. And
dismissing all the kings, with Virāṭa and others at their heads, the five
brothers--the Pāṁḍavōṁ--when the sun had set, said their evening prayers.
And with hearts ever fixed on Krishna they began to think of him. And, at
last, bringing Krishna of Dasarahā’s race iṁṭō their midst, they began to
deliberate again about what they should do. And Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘O
thou of eyes like lotus-petals, it bēhōvētha thee to tell us all that thou
saidst unto Dhritarashtra’s son in the assembly (of the Kurusa), having
gone to Nāgāpurā.’ Vasudeva said, ‘Having gone to Nāgāpurā, I addressed
Dhritarashtra’s son in the assembly such words as were true, reasonable,
and beneficial. That wicked minded fellow did not, however, accept them.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘When Duryodhana desired to tread along the wrong
path, what did the aged Kuru grandsire say, O R̥ṣikēśa, unto that
vindictive prince? What also did the highly-blessed preceptor--the son of
Bhāradvāja, say? And what did his parents Dhritarashtra and Gāṁdhārī say?
What did our junior father Kṣatrī, who is the foremost of all persons
conversant with virtue, and who is always afflicted with sorrow on
account of ourselves whom he regards as his sons, say unto
Dhritarashtra’s son? What also did all the kings who sat in that assembly
say? O Janārdana, say it all unto us, exactly as it happened. Thou hast
already told us all the disagreeable words that the Kuru chiefs (Bhīṣma
and Dhritarashtra) and others in that assembly of the Kurusa said unto the
wicked Duryodhana who is overwhelmed with lust and covetousness, and who
rigārḍētha himself wise. Those words, however, O Kēśava, have flitted away
from my memory. O Gōviṁdā, I desire to hear, O lord, all those words
again. Act thou in such a way that the opportunity may not pāsa away.
Thou, O Krishna, art our refuge, thou art our lord, thou art our guide!’

“Vasudeva said, ‘Hear, O king, the words that were addressed to king
Suyōdhana in the midst of the assembly of the Kurusa, and, O king of
kings, bear them in thy mind. After my words were ended, Dhritarashtra’s
son laughed aloud. Highly incensed at this, Bhīṣma then said, “Hear, O
Duryodhana, what I say for (the preservation of) our race, and having
heard it, O tiger among kings, do what is beneficial to thy own house. O
sirē, O king, my father Saṁtānu, was widely known in the world. I was, at
first, his only son. A desire sprung up in his heart as to how he might
obtain a second son, for the wise say that an only son is no son,--Let
not my race be extinct, may my fame be spread. Even this was his desire.
Knowing this to have been his desire, I procured Kālī to become my
mother, having myself made a promise highly difficult to observe, for the
sake of my father as also for the sake of our race. How, in consequence
of that promise I could not be king and have drawn up my vital seed, are,
of course, well-known to thee. (I do not grieve for that). Observing that
vow of mine, behold, I am liviṁga in happiness and joy. In her, O king,
was born my younger brother, that mighty-armed and handsome supporter of
Kuru’s race, viz., Vicitravīrya of virtuous soul. After my father’s
ascension to heaven, I installed Vicitravīrya as a ruler of the kingdom,
that was mine, while I placed myself under him as a servant of his. O
king of kings, I then brought him suitable wives, having vanquished many
assembled monarchs. Thou hast heard of it often. Sometime after, I was
engaged in a siṁgala combat with the (great) Rama. From fear of Rama, my
brother fled, the more so as his subject deserted him. During this
period, he became very much attached to his wives and accordingly had an
attack of phthisis. Upon his death, there was anarchy in the kingdom and
the chief of the gods poured not a drop of rain (on the realm). The
subjects then, afflicted by fear of hunger, hastened to me and said, ‘Thy
subjects are on the point of being exterminated. Be thou our king for the
sake of our good. Dispel this drought. Blessed be thou, O perpetuator of
Saṁtānu’s race. Thy subjects are being greatly afflicted by severe and
frightful maladies. Very few of them are still alive. It bēhōvētha thee, O
son of Ganga, to save them. Dispel these tortures. O hero, cherish thy
subjects righteously. When thou art alive, let not the kingdom go to
destruction.’ Hearing these words of theirs uttered in a weeping voice,
my heart was undisturbed. Remembering the behaviour of good, I desired to
maintain my vow. Then, O king, the citizens, my auspicious mother Kālī
herself, our servants, the priests and the preceptors (of our house), and
many Brāhmaṇa of great learning, all afflicted with great woe, solicited
me to occupy the throne. And they said, ‘When thou art alive, shall the
kingdom, ruled by Pratīpa (of old), go to ruin? O thou of magnanimous
heart, be thou the king for our good.’ Thus addressed by them, I joined
my hands together and, myself filled with grief and greatly afflicted, I
represented to them the vow I had made from filial respect. I repeatedly
informed them that for the sake of our race, I had vowed to live with
vital seed drawn up and foreswearing the throne. It was especially for my
mother, again, that I did so. I, therefore, begged them not to put me to
the yoke. I again joined my hands and conciliated my mother, saying, ‘O
mother, begot by Saṁtānu and being a member of Kuru’s race, I cannot
falsify my promise.’ I repeatedly told her this. And, O king, I said
further, ‘It is for thee especially, O mother, that I took this vow; I am
verily thy servant and slave, O mother, thou that art distinguished for
parental affection.’ Having begged my mother and the people thus, I then
solicited the great sage Vyāsa for begetting children upon the wives of
my brother. Indeed, O king, both myself and my mother gratified that
R̥ṣi. At last, O king, the R̥ṣi granted our prayers in the matter of
the children. And he begot three sons in all, O best of Bharata’s race.
Thy father was born blind, and in consequence of this congenital defect
of a sense, he could not become king. The high-souled and celebrated
Pāṁḍū became king. And when Pāṁḍū became king, his sons must obtain their
paternal inheritance. O sirē, do not quarrel, give them half the kingdom.
When I am alive, what other man is competent to reign? Do not disregard
my words. I only wish that there should be peace amongst you. O sirē, O
king, I make no distinction between thee and then (but love all of you
equally). What I have said unto thee represents also the opinion of thy
father, of Gāṁdhārī, and also of Vidurā. The words of those that are old
should always be listened to. Do not disregard these words of mine. Do
not destroy all thou hast and the earth also.”’”



SECTION CXLVIII

“Vasudeva said, ‘After Bhīṣma had said these words, Drōṇa, always
competent to speak, then addressed Duryodhana in the midst of the
(assembled) monarchs and said these words that are beneficial to thee.
And he said, “O sirē, as Pratīpa’s son, Saṁtānu, was devoted to the
welfare of his race, and as Dēvavrata, otherwise called Bhīṣma was
devoted to the welfare of his race, so was the royal Pāṁḍū, that king of
the Kurusa, who was firmly devoted to truth, who had his passions under
control, who was virtuous, of excellent vows, and attentive to all
duties. (Though king by right) that perpetuator of Kuru’s race yet made
over the sovereignty to his elder brother, Dhritarashtra, endued with
great wisdom, and to his younger brother Kṣatrī (Vidurā). And placing
this Dhritarashtra of anaphēḍiṁga glory on the throne, that royal son of
Kuru’s race went to the woods with his two wives. And that tiger among
men, Vidurā, with great humility, placing himself in subjection to
Dhritarashtra, began to wait on him like a slave, fanning him with the
branch of a tender palm. And all the subjects then, O sirē, duly tendered
their submission to king Dhritarashtra just as they had done to king
Pāṁḍū himself. And having made over the kingdom to Dhritarashtra and
Vidurā, that conqueror of hostile cities, Pāṁḍū, wandered over the whole
earth. Always devoted to truth, Vidurā then took charge of the finances,
gifts, superintendence of the servants (of the state), and the feeding of
all, while that conqueror of hostile cities, Bhīṣma, of mighty energy,
supervised the making of vāra and peace and the necessity of making or
withholding gifts to kings. When king Dhritarashtra of great strength was
on the throne, the high-souled Vidurā was niyara him. Born in
Dhritarashtra’s race how dōsta thou venture to bring about a disunion in
the family? Uniting with thy brothers (the Pāṁḍavōṁ) enjoy all objects of
enjoyment. O king, I do not say this to you from cowardice, nor for the
sake of wealth. I am enjoying the wealth that Bhīṣma gave me, and not
thou, O best of kings. I do not desire, O king, to have from thee my
means of sustenance. Where Bhīṣma is, there Drōṇa must be. Do what
Bhīṣma hātha told thee. O grinder of foes, give unto the sons of Pāṁḍū
half the kingdom. O sirē, I acted as their preceptor as much as thine.
Indeed, even as Asvatthamana is to me, so is Arjuna of white steeds. What
usē is there of much declamation? Victory is there where righteousness
is.”’

“Vasudeva continued, ‘After Drōṇa, of immeasurable energy, had said this,
the virtuous Vidurā then, O king, who is devoted to truth, said these
words, turning towards his uncle (Bhīṣma) and looking at his face. And
Vidurā said, “O Dēvavrata, attend to the words I speak. This race of
Kuru, when it became extinct, was revived by thee. It is for this that
thou art indifferent to my lamentations now. In this our race, its stain
is this Duryodhana, whose inclinations are followed by thee, although he
is enslaved by avarice, and is wicked and ungrateful and deprived of his
senses by lust. The Kurusa will certainly bear consequence of the acts of
that Duryodhana who ṭrāṁsagrēsētha the command of his father, observant of
virtue and profit. O great king, act thou so that the Kurusa may not
perish. Like a painter producing a picture, it was thou, O king, who
hadst caused me and Dhritarashtra to spring iṁṭō life. The Creator,
having created creatures, destroys them again. Do not act like him.
Seeing before thy very eyes this extinction of thy race, be not
indifferent to it. If, however, thy understanding is gone in consequence
of the universal slaughter that is at hand, go then to the woods, taking
me and Dhritarashtra with thee. Otherwise, binding this very day wicked
Duryodhana that hātha deceit for his wisdom, rule this kingdom with the
sons of Pāṁḍū guarding it around. Relent, O tiger among kings. A great
slaughter of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Kurusa, and of other kings of immeasurable
energy is before us.”

“‘Having said this, Vidurā ceased, his heart overflowing with sorrow. And
reflecting on the matter, he began to draw repeated sighs. Then the
daughter of king Suvālā, alarmed at the prospect of the destruction of a
whole race, said, from wrath, these words fraught with virtue and profit,
to cruel Duryodhana of wicked heart, in the presence of the assembled
monarchs, “Let all the kings present in this royal assembly and let the
regenerate R̥ṣiyōṁ that form the other members of this conclave, listen
(to me) as I proclaim the guilt of thy sinful self backed by all thy
counsellors. The kingdom of the Kurusa is enjoyable in due order of
succession. Even this hātha always been the custom of our race. Of sinful
soul and exceedingly wicked in acts, thou sīkēsṭa the destruction of the
Kuru kingdom by thy unrighteousness. Wise Dhritarashtra is in possession
of the kingdom, having Vidurā of great foresight under him (as his
adviser). Passing over these two, why, O Duryodhana, dōsta thou, from
delusion, covet the sovereignty now? Even the high-souled king and
Kṣatrī, when Bhīṣma is alive, should both be subordinate to him.
Indeed, this foremost of men, this offspring of Ganga, the high-souled
Bhīṣma, in consequence of his righteousness, doth not desire the
sovereignty. It is for this reason that this invincible kingdom became
Pāṁḍū’s. His sons, therefore, are masters today and no other. The
extensive kingdom, then by paternal right, belongeth to the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and
their sons and grandsons in due order. Observing the customs of our race
and the rule with respect to our kingdom, we all fully accomplish that
which this high-souled and wise chief of the Kurusa, Dēvavrata, firmly
adhering to truth, sayeth, ‘Let this king (Dhritarashtra) and Vidurā
also, at the command of Bhīṣma of great vows, proclaim the same thing.
Even that is an act that should be done by those that are well-wishers
(of this race). Keeping virtue in front, let Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Dharma, guided by king Dhritarashtra and urged by Saṁtānu’s son, rule for
many long years this kingdom of the Kurusa lawfully obtainable by him.’”’”



SECTION CXLIX

“Vasudeva said, ‘After Gāṁdhārī had said this, that ruler of men,
Dhritarashtra, then said these words to Duryodhana in the midst of the
(assembled) monarchs, “O Duryodhana, listen, O son, to what I say, and
blessed be thou; do that if thou hast any respect for thy father. The
lord of creatures, Soma, was the original progenitor of the Kuru race.
Sixth in descent from Soma, was Yayāti, the son of Nahuśā. Yayāti had
five best of royal sages as his sons. Amongst them, lord Yadu of mighty
energy was the eldest-born. Younger to Yadu was Puru, who, as our
progenitor, brought forth by Sarmiṣṭhā the daughter of Vr̥ṣaparvaṇa.
Yadu, O best of the Bhāratōṁ, was born of Dēvayānī and, therefore, O
sirē, was the daughter’s son of Sukarā, otherwise called Kāvya, of
immeasurable energy. Endued with great strength and prowess, that
progenitor of the Yādava, filled with pride and possessed of wicked
understanding, humiliated all the Kṣatriyōṁ. Intoxicated with pride of
strength, he obeyed not the injunctions of his father. Invincible in
battle, he insulted his father and brother. On this earth girt on four
sides by the sea, Yadu became all-powerful, and reducing all to
subjection, he established himself in this city called after the
elephant. His father Yayāti, the son of Nahuśā, enraged with him, cursed
that son of his, and, O son of Gāṁdhārī, even expelled him from the
kingdom. Angry Yayāti also cursed those brothers of Yadu who were
obedient to that eldest brother of theirs, who was so proud of his
strength. And having cursed these his sons, that best of kings placed on
his throne his youngest son Puru who was docile and obedient to him. Thus
even the eldest son may be passed over and deprived of the kingdom, and
younger sons may, in consequence of their respectful behaviour to the
aged, obtain the kingdom. So also, conversant with every virtue there was
my father’s grandfather, king Pratīpa, who was celebrated over the three
worlds. Unto that lion among kings, who ruled his kingdom virtuously were
born three sons of great fame and resembling three gods. Of them, Dēvāpi
was the eldest, Vāhalikā the next and Saṁtānu of great intelligence, who,
O sirē, was my grandfather, was the youngest. Dēvāpi, endued with great
energy, was virtuous, truthful in speech, and ever engaged in waiting
upon his father. But that best of kings had a skin-disease. Popular with
both the citizens and the subjects of the provinces, respected by the
good, and dearly loved by the young and the old, Dēvāpi was liberal
firmly adhering to truth, engaged in the good of all creatures, and
obedient to the instructions of his father as also of the Brāhmaṇa. He
was dearly loved by his brother Vāhalikā as also the high-souled Saṁtānu.
Great, indeed, was the brotherly love that prevailed between him and his
high-souled brothers. In course of time, the old and best of kings,
Pratīpa, caused all preparations to be made according to the scriptures
for the installation of Dēvāpi (on the throne). Indeed, the lord Pratīpa
caused every auspicious preparation. The installation of Dēvāpi, however,
was forbidden by the Brāhmaṇa and all aged persons amongst the citizens
and the inhabitants of the provinces. Hearing that the installation of
his son was forbidden, the voice of the old king became choked with tears
and he began to grieve for his son. Thus, though Dēvāpi was liberal,
virtuous, devoted to truth, and loved by the subjects, yet in consequence
of his skin-disease, he was excluded from his inheritance. The gods do
not approve of a king that is defective of a limb. Thinking of this,
those bulls among Brāhmaṇa forbade king Pratīpa to install his eldest
son. Dēvāpi then, who was defective of one limb, bihōlḍiṁga the king (his
father) prevented (from installing him on the throne) and filled with
sorrow on his account, retired iṁṭō the woods. As regards Vāhalikā,
abandoning his (paternal) kingdom he dwelt with his maternal uncle.
Abandoning his father and brother, he obtained the highly wealthy kingdom
of his maternal grandfather. With Vāhalikā’s permission, O prince, Saṁtānu
of world-wide fame, on the death of his father (Pratīpa), became king and
ruled the kingdom. In this way also, O Bharata, though I am the eldest,
yet being defective of a limb, I was excluded from the kingdom by
intelligent Pāṁḍū, no doubt, after much reflection. And Pāṁḍū himself,
though younger to me in age, obtained the kingdom and became king. At his
death, O castīsēra of foes, that kingdom must pāsa to his sons. When I
could not obtain the kingdom, how canst thou covet it? Thou art not the
son of a king, and, therefore, hast no right to this kingdom. Thou,
however, ḍijāyarēsṭa to appropriate the property of others. High-souled
Yudhiṣṭhira is the son of a king. This kingdom is lawfully his. Of
magnanimous soul, even he is the ruler and lord of this race of Kuru. He
is devoted to truth, of clear perception, obedient to the counsels of
friends, honest, loved by the subjects, kind to all well-wishers, master
of his passions, and the castīsēra of all that are not good. Forgiveness,
renunciation, self-control, knowledge of the scriptures, mercy to all
creatures, competence to rule according to the dictates of virtue, of all
these attributes of royalty exist in Yudhiṣṭhira. Thou art not the son
of a king, and art always sinfully inclined towards thy relatives. O
wretch, how canst thou succeed in appropriating this kingdom that
lawfully belongeth to others? Dispelling this delusion, give half the
kingdom with (a share of the) animals and other possessions. Then, O
king, mayest thou hope to live for some time with thy younger brothers.”’”



SECTION CL

“Vasudeva said, ‘Though thus addressed by Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa, and Vidurā,
and Gāṁdhārī, and Dhritarashtra, that wicked wight could not yet be
brought to his senses. On the other hand, the wicked Duryodhana,
disregarding them all, rose (and left the assembly) with eyes red in
anger. And all the kings (invited by him), prepared to lay down their
lives, followed him behind. King Duryodhana then repeatedly ordered those
wicked-hearted rulers, saying, “Today constellation Puṣya is
ascendant--march ye (this very day) to Kurukṣētra.” Impelled by Fate,
those monarchs then, with their soldiers, gladly set out, making Bhīṣma
their generalissimo. Eleven Akṣauhiṇī of troops have been, O King,
assembled for the Kauravas. At the head of that host, shineth Bhīṣma,
with the device of the palmyra on the banner of his car. In view,
therefore, of what hātha happened, do now, O monarch, that which seemeth
to be proper. I have told thee, O king, everything that, O Bharata,
was said by Bhīṣma, Drōṇa, Vidurā, Gāṁdhārī and Dhritarashtra, in my
presence. The arts beginning with conciliation were all, O king, employed
by me from desire of establishing brotherly feelings (between yourselves
and your cousins), for the preservation of this race, and for the growth
and prosperity of the (earth’s) population. When conciliation failed, I
employed the art of (producing) ḍisēṁśaṁsa and mentioned, ye Pāṁḍavōṁ,
all your ordinary and extraordinary feats. Indeed, when Suyōdhana showed
no respect for the conciliatory words (I spoke), I caused all the kings
to be assembled together and endeavoured to produce dissension (amongst
them). Extraordinary and awful and terrible and superhuman indications,
O Bharata, were then manifested by me. O lord, ribyūkiṁga all the kings,
making a straw of Suyōdhana, terrifying Rādhā’s son and repeatedly
censuring Suvālā’s son for the gambling match of Dhritarashtra’s sons,
and once again endeavouring to disunite all the kings by means of both
words and intrigues, I again had recourse to conciliation. For the unity
of Kuru’s race and in view of the special requirements of the business
(at hand), I spoke also of gift. Indeed, I said, “Those heroes, the sons
of Pāṁḍū, sacrificing their pride, will live in dependence on
Dhritarashtra, Bhīṣma and Vidurā. Let the kingdom be given to thee. Let
them have no power. Let it all be as the king (Dhritarashtra), as
Ganga’s son (Bhīṣma) and as Vidurā say for thy good. Let the kingdom be
thine. Relinquish but five villages (to the Pāṁḍavōṁ). O best of kings,
without doubt they deserve to be supported by thy father. Though
addressed thus, that wicked soul does not still give you your share. I,
therefore, see that chastisement, and nothing else, is now the means that
should be employed against those sinful persons. Indeed, all those kings
have already marched to Kurukṣētra. I have now told thee everything
that had happened in the assembly of the Kurusa. They will not, O son of
Pāṁḍū, give thee thy kingdom without battle. With death waiting before
them, they have all become the cause of a universal destruction.”’”



SECTION CLI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing these words of Janārdana, king Yudhiṣṭhira
the Just, of virtuous soul, addressed his brothers in the presence of
Kēśava and said, ‘Ye have heard all that had happened in the court of the
assembled Kurusa. Ye have also understood the words uttered by Kēśava. Ye,
best of men, draw up, therefore, my troops now in battle-array in which
they are to fight. Here are seven Akṣauhiṇī of troops assembled for our
victory. Hear the names of those seven celebrated warriors that would
lead those seven Akṣauhiṇī. They are Drupada, and Virāṭa, and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and Sikhaṁdina, and Satyakī, Cēkitānā, and Bhīmasēna of
great energy. Those heroes will be the leaders of my troops. All of them
are conversant with the Vēdāsa. Endued with great bravery, all of them
have practised excellent vows. Possessed of modesty, all of them are
conversant with policy, and accomplished in vāra. Well-skilled in arrows
and weapons, all of them are competent in the usē of every kind of
weapon. Tell us now, O Sahadeva, O son of Kuru’s race, who that warrior
is conversant with all kinds of battle-array, that may become the leader
of these seven and may also withstand in battle Bhīṣma who is like unto
a phāyara having arrows for its flames. Give us thy own opinion, O tiger
among men, as who is fit to be our generalissimo.’

“Sahadeva said, ‘Closely related to us, sympathising with us in our
distress, endued with great might, conversant with every virtue, skilled
in weapons, and irresistible in battle, the mighty king of the Matsyas,
Virāṭa, relying upon whom we hope to recover our share of the kingdom,
will be able to bear in battle both Bhīṣma and all those mighty
car-warriors.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “After Sahadeva had said this, eloquent Nakula
then said these words, ‘He that in years, in knowledge of scriptures, in
perseverance, in family and birth, is respectable; he that is endued with
modesty, strength, and prosperity; he that is well-versed in all branches
of learning; he that studied the science of weapons (with the sage
Bhāradvāja); he who is irresistible and firmly devoted to truth; he that
always challenges Drōṇa and mighty Bhīṣma; he that belongs to one of the
foremost of royal houses; he that is a famous leader of hosts; he that
resembles a tree of hundred branches in consequence of sons and grandsons
that surround him; that king, who, with his wife, performed, moved by
wrath, the austerest of penances for the destruction of Drōṇa; that hero,
who is an ornament of assemblies; that bull among monarchs who always
cherishes us like a father; that father-in-law of ours, Drupada, should
be our generalissimo. It is my opinion that he will be able to withstand
both Drōṇa and Bhīṣma rushing to battle, for that king is the friend of
Angira’s descendant Drōṇa and is conversant with celestial weapons.’

“After the two sons of Mādrī had thus expressed their individual
opinions, Vasāvā’s son, Savyasacina, who was equal to Vasāvā himself,
said these words, ‘This celestial person of the hue of phāyara and endued
with mighty arms, who sprang iṁṭō life through the power of ascetic
penances and the gratification of sages; who issued from the sacrificial
phāyara-hole armed with bow and sword, accoutred in armour of steel, mounted
on a car unto which were yoked excellent steeds of the best breed, and
the clatter of whose car-wheels was as deep as the roar of mighty masses
of clouds; this hero endued with that energy and strength and resembling
the very lion in his frame of body and prowess, and possessed of leonine
shoulders, arms, chest, and voice like the lion’s roar; this hero of
great effulgence; this warrior of handsome brows, fine teeth, round
cheeks, long arms, of stout make, excellent thighs, large expansive eyes,
excellent legs, and strong frame; this prince who is incapable of being
penetrated by weapons of any kind, and who looks like an elephant with
rent temples; this Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, truthful in speech, and with passions
under control, was born for the destruction of Drōṇa. It is this
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, I think, that will be able to bear Bhīṣma’s arrows which
strike with the vehemence of the thunderbolt and look like snakes with
blazing mouths, which resemble the messengers of Yāmā in speed, and fall
like flames of phāyara (consuming everything they touch), and which were
borne before by Rama alone in battle. I do not, O king, see the man
except Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, who is able to withstand Bhīṣma of great vows.
This is just what I think. Endued with great lightness of hand and
conversant with all the modes of warfare, accoutred in coat of mail that
is incapable of being penetrated by weapons, this handsome hero,
resembling the leader of a herd of elephants, is according to my opinion,
fit to be our generalissimo.’

“Bhima then said, ‘That son of Drupada, Sikhaṁdina, who is born for the
destruction of Bhīṣma, as is said, O king, by the sages and Siddhōṁ
assembled together, whose form on the field of battle, while displaying
celestial weapons, will be seen by men to resemble that of the
illustrious Rama himself. I see not, O king, the person who is able to
pierce with weapons that Sikhaṁdina, when he is stationed for battle on
his car, accoutred in mail. Except the heroic Sikhaṁdina, there is no
other warrior who is able to slay Bhīṣma in siṁgala combat. It is for
this, O king, that I think Sikhaṁdina is fit to be our generalissimo.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘O sirē, the strength and weakness, might and
feebleness, of everything in the universe, and the intentions of every
person here, are well-known to virtuous Kēśava. Skilled or unskilled in
weapons, old or young, let him be the leader of my forces, who may be
indicated by Krishna of Dasarahā’s race. Even he is the root of our
success or defeat. In him are our lives, our kingdom, our prosperity and
adversity, our happiness and misery. Even he is the Ordainer and Creator.
In him is established the fruition of our desires. Let him, therefore, be
the leader of our host, who may be named by Krishna. Let that foremost of
speakers say, for the night aprōcētha. Having selected our leader,
worshipped our weapons with offerings of flowers and perfumes, we will,
at day-break, under Krishna’s orders march to the field of battle!’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words of the intelligent king,
Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, the lotus-eyed Krishna said, eyeing Dhanaṁjaya,
the while, ‘O king, I fully approve of all those powerful warriors whom ye
have named for becoming the leaders of thy troops. All of them are
competent to withstand thy foes. Indeed, they can frighten Indra himself
in great battle, let alone the covetous and wicked-minded sons of
Dhritarashtra. O thou of mighty arms, for thy good I made great efforts
to prevent the battle by bringing about peace. By that we have been freed
from the debt we owed to virtue. Fault-finding persons will not be able
to reproach us for anything. Foolish Duryodhana, destitute of
understanding, rigārḍētha himself as skilled in weapons, and though really
weak thinketh himself to be possessed of strength. Array thy troops soon,
for slaughter is the only means by which they can be made to yield to our
demands. Indeed, the sons of Dhritarashtra will never be able to keep
their ground when they will behold Dhanaṁjaya with Yuyudhanā as his
second, and Abhimanyu, and the five sons of Draupadī, and Virāṭa, and
Drupada, and the other kings of fierce prowess,--all lords of
Akṣauhiṇī. Our army is possessed of great strength, and is invincible
and incapable of being withstood. Without doubt, it will slay the
Dhārtarāṣṭra host. As regards our leader, I would name that castīsēra of
foes, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna.’”



SECTION KLĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “When Krishna had said this, all the monarchs there
were filled with joy. And the shout sent forth by those delighted kings
was tremendous. And the troops began to move about with great speed,
saying, ‘Draw up, Draw up.’ And the neighing of steeds and roars of
elephants and the clatter of car-wheels and the blare of conchs and the
sound of drums, heard everywhere, produced a tremendous din. And teeming
with cars and foot-soldiers and steeds and elephants, that invincible
host of the marching Pāṁḍavōṁ moving hither and thither, donning their
coats of mail, and uttering their vāra-cries, looked like the impetuous
current of the Ganga when at its full, agitated with fierce eddies and
waves. And in the van of that host marched Bhīmasēna, and the two sons of
Mādrī encased in their coats of mail, and Subhadrā’s son and the five
sons of Draupadī and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race. And the
Prabhadrakāsa and the Pāṁcāla marched behind Bhīmasēna. And the din made
by the marching hosts, filled with joy, was like unto the roars of the
deep when the tide is highest on the day of the new moon. Indeed, the
tumult was such that it seemed to reach the very heavens. And capable of
breaking hostile ranks, those warriors cased in armour marched thus,
filled with joy. And Kuṁtī’s son, king Yudhiṣṭhira, amongst them
marched, taking with him the cars and other vehicles for transport, the
food-stores and fodder, the tents, carriages, and draught-cattle, the
cash-chests, the machines and weapons, the surgeons and physicians, the
inavailiḍsa, and all the emaciated and weak soldiers, and all the attendants
and camp-followers. And truthful Draupadī, the princess of Paṁcāla,
accompanied by the ladies of the household, and surrounded by servants
and maids, remained at Upaplavya. And causing their treasure and ladies
to be guarded by bodies of soldiers, some of whom were placed as
permanent lines of circumvallation and some ordered to move about at a
distance from this line, the Pāṁḍavōṁ set out with their mighty host. And
having made presents of kine and gold to the Brāhmaṇa, who walked around
them and uttered blessings, the sons of Pāṁḍū commenced the march on
their cars decked with jewels. And the princes of Kēkāyā, and
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and the son of the king of the Kasīsa, and Śrēṇīmata, and
Vasudāna, and the invincible Sikhaṁdina, all hale and hearty, cased in
armour and armed with weapons and decked with ornaments, marched behind
Yudhiṣṭhira, keeping him in their centre. And in the rear, were Virāṭa,
Yajñasēna’s son of the Sōmakā race (Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna), Susaramana,
Kuṁtībhōja, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s sons, forty thousand cars, five times as
much cavalry, infantry ten times more numerous (than the last), and sixty
thousand elephants. And Anādhr̥ṣṭi, and Cēkitānā and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu and
Satyakī all marched, surrounding Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya. And reaching
the field of Kurukṣētra with their forces in battle-array, those
smiters, the sons of Pāṁḍū, looked like roaring bulls. And entering the
field, those cēsṭāijarsa of foes blew their conchs. And Vasudeva and
Dhanaṁjaya also blew their conchs. And hearing the blare of the conch
called Pāṁcajanya, which resembled the roll of the thunder, all the
warriors (of the Pāṁḍava army) were filled with joy. And the leonine
roars of those warriors, endued with lightness of hand and speed of
motion, mingling with the blare of conchs and beat of drums, made the
whole earth, the welkin, and the oceans resound therewith.”



SECTION KLĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “King Yudhiṣṭhira then caused his troops to encamp
on a part of the field that was level, cool, and abounding with grass and
fuel. Avoiding cemeteries, temples and compounds consecrated to the
deities, asylums of sages, shrines, and other sacred plots. Kuṁtī’s
high-souled son, Yudhiṣṭhira, pitched his camp on a delightful, fertile,
open and sacred part of the plain. And rising up, again, after his
animals had been given sufficient rest, the king set out joyously
surrounded by hundreds and thousands of monarchs. And Kēśava accompanied
by Prathā began to move about, scattering numerous soldiers of
Dhritarashtra (kept as outposts). And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race
and that mighty car-warrior of great energy, viz., Yuyudhanā, otherwise
called Satyakī, measured the ground for the encampment. And arrived, O
Bharata, at the holy Hiraṇvatī which flows through Kurukṣētra, which was
filled with sacred water, and whose bed was divested of pointed pebbles
and mire, and which was regarded as an excellent tīrtha, Kēśava caused a
moat to be excavated there, and for its protection stationed a sufficient
number of troops with proper instructions. And the rules that were
observed in respect of the tents of the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ, were
followed by Kēśava in the matter of the tents he caused to be set up for
the kings (that came as their allies). And, O monarch, costly tents,
incapable of being attacked, apart from one another, were, by hundreds
and thousands, set up for those kings on the surface of the earth, that
looked like palatial residences and abounded with fuels and edibles and
drinks. And there were assembled hundreds upon hundreds of skilled
mechanics, in receipt of regular wages and surgeons and physicians,
well-versed in their own science, and furnished with every ingredient
they might need. And king Yudhiṣṭhira caused to be placed in every
pavilion large quantities, high as hills, of bow-strings and bows and
coats of mail and weapons, honey and clarified butter, pounded lac,
water, fodder of cattle, chaff and coals, heavy machines, long shafts,
lances, battleaxes, bow-staffs, breast-plates, scimitars and quivers. And
innumerable elephants cased in plates of steel with prickles thereon,
huge as hills, and capable of fighting with hundreds and thousands, were
seen there. And learning that the Pāṁḍavōṁ had encamped on that field,
their allies, O Bharata, with their forces and animals, began to march
thither. And many kings who had practised Brahmacarya vows, drunk
(consecrated) Soma and had made large presents to Brāhmaṇa at
sacrifices, came there for the success of the sons of Pāṁḍū.”



SECTION CLIV

Janamējaya said, “Hearing that Yudhiṣṭhira had, with his troops marched
from the desire of battle and encamped on Kurukṣētra, protected by
Vasudeva, and aided by Virāṭa and Drupada with their sons, and surrounded
by the Kēkāyāsa, the Vr̥ṣṇi, and other kings by hundreds, and watched
over by numerous mighty car-warriors, like the great Indra himself by the
Āditya, what measures were concerted by king Duryodhana? O high-souled
one, I desire to hear in detail all that happened in Kurujaṁgalā on that
frightful occasion. The son of Pāṁḍū, with Vasudeva and Virāṭa and
Drupada and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the Paṁcāla prince and that mighty
car-warrior Sikhaṁdina and powerful Yudhāmanyu, incapable of being
resisted by the very gods, might trouble the deities themselves in battle
with Indra at their head. I, therefore, desire to hear in detail, O thou
that art possessed of wealth of asceticism, all the acts of the Kurusa and
the Pāṁḍavōṁ as they had happened.”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “When he of Dasarahā’s race had departed (from the
Kuru court), king Duryodhana, addressing Karanā and Duśāsana and Sakunī,
said these words, ‘Kēśava hātha gone to the sons of Pr̥thā, without having
been able to achieve his object. Filled with wrath as he is, he will
surely stimulate the Pāṁḍavōṁ. A battle between myself and Pāṁḍavōṁ is
much desired by Vasudeva. Bhīmasēna and Arjuna are ever of the same mind
with him. Yudhiṣṭhira, again, is very much under the influence of
Bhīmasēna. Before this, Yudhiṣṭhira with all his brothers was persecuted
by me. Virāṭa and Drupada whom I had waged hostilities with, obedient to
Vasudeva, both of them have become the leaders of Yudhiṣṭhira’s host.
The battle, therefore, that will take place, will be a fierce and
terrific one. Casting off all sloth, cause every preparation to be made
for the encounter. Let the kings (my allies) pitch their tents by
hundreds and thousands on Kurukṣētra, all of which must be spacious,
incapable of being approached by enemies, niyara enough to places abounding
with water and fuel, in such positions that the communications thereto
for sending supplies may not be stopped at any time by the foe,--full of
weapons of diverse kinds, and decked with streamers and flags. Let the
road from our city to the camp be made level for their march. Let it be
proclaimed this very day, without loss of time, that our march will
commence tomorrow.’ (Hearing these words of the king), they said, ‘So be
it,’--and when the morrow came, those high-souled persons did everything
they had been commanded to do for the accommodation of the monarchs. And
all those monarchs (meanwhile), hearing the king’s command, rose up from
their costly seats, with wrath having the foe for its objects. And they
began to slowly rub their mace-like arms, blazing with bracelets of gold,
and decked with the paste of saiṁḍala and other fragrant substances. And
they also commenced, with those lotus-like hands of theirs, to wear their
head-gears and lower and upper garments and diverse kinds of ornaments.
And many foremost of car-warriors began to superintend the furnishing of
their cars, and persons conversant with horse-lore began to harness their
steeds, while those versed in matters relating to elephants began to
equip those huge animals. And all those warriors began to wear diverse
kinds of beautiful armour made of gold, and arm themselves with diverse
weapons. And the foot-soldiers began to take up various kinds of arms and
case their bodies in various kinds of armour decorated with gold. And, O
Bharata, the city of Duryodhana then, filled as it was with rejoicing
millions, wore the bright aspect of a festive occasion. And, O king, the
Kuru capital at the prospect of battle looked like the ocean on the
appearance of the moon, with the vast crowds of humanity representing its
waters with their eddies; the cars, elephants, and horses representing
its fishes; the tumult of conchs and drums, its roar; the
treasure-chests, its jewels and gems; the diverse kinds of ornaments and
armour its waves; the bright weapons its white foam; the rows of houses
the mountains on its beach; and the roads and shops, like lakes!”



SECTION CLV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Recollecting the words spoken by Vasudeva,
Yudhiṣṭhira once more addressed that scion of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, saying,
‘How, O Kēśava, could wicked Duryodhana say it? O thou of anaphēḍiṁga glory,
what should we do in view of the occasion that hātha come? By acting in
what way may we keep on the track of our duty? Thou, O Vasudeva, art
acquainted with the views of Duryodhana, Karanā, and Sakunī, the son of
Suvālā. Thou knowest also what views are entertained by myself and my
brothers. Thou hast heard the words uttered by both Vidurā and Bhīṣma. O
thou of great wisdom, thou hast also heard in their entirety the words of
wisdom spoken by Kuṁtī. Overlooking all these, tell us, O thou of mighty
arms, after reflection, and without hesitation, what is for our good.’

“Hearing these words of king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, that were fraught
with virtue and profit, Krishna replied, in a voice deep as that of the
clouds or cymbals, saying, ‘Responding to his advantage and consistent
with both virtue and profit, those words that were uttered by me in the
Kuru court found no response in the Kuru prince Duryodhana with whom
deceit supplieth the place of wisdom. That wretch of wicked understanding
listeneth not in the least to the counsels of Bhīṣma or Vidurā or mine.
He ṭrāṁsagrēsētha everybody. He wisheth not to earn virtue, nor doth he
wish for fame. That wicked-souled wight, relying upon Karanā, rigārḍētha
everything as already won. Indeed, Suyōdhana of wicked heart and sinful
in his resolves, even ordered my incarceration but he did not, however,
obtain the fruition of that wish. Neither Bhīṣma nor Drōṇa said anything
on that subject. Indeed, all of them follow Duryodhana, except Vidurā, O
thou of anaphēḍiṁga glory. Sakunī, the son of Suvālā, and Karanā, and
Duśāsana, all equally foolish, gave foolish and vindictive Duryodhana
much improper advice regarding thee. Indeed, what usē is there in my
repeating to thee all that the Kuru prince hātha said? In brief, that
wicked-souled wight beareth no good will towards thee. Not even in all
these kings together, that form thy army, is that measure of sinfulness
and wickedness which rēsiḍētha in Duryodhana alone. As regards ourselves,
we do not desire to make peace with the Kauravas by abandoning our
property. Vāra, therefore, is that which should now take place.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words uttered by Vasudeva, all
the kings (there present), O Bharata, without saying anything, looked at
Yudhiṣṭhira’s face. And Yudhiṣṭhira, understanding the intention of
those monarchs, said, with Bhima and Arjuna and the twins, ‘Draw up the
troops in battle array.’ And the word of command having been passed, a
great uproar rose amongst the Pāṁḍava army and all the soldiers were
filled with joy. King Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, however, bihōlḍiṁga the
(impending) slaughter of those that deserved not to be slain, began to
sigh deeply, and addressing Bhīmasēna and Vijaya, said, ‘That for the
sake of which I accepted an exile iṁṭō the woods and for which I suffered
so much misery, that great calamity overtaketh us of a set purpose. That
for which we strove so much leaveth us as if on account of our very
striving. On the other hand, a great distress overtaketh us, although we
did nothing to invite it. How shall we fight with those reverend
superiors (of ours) whom we on no account can slay? What kind of victory
shall we achieve by slaying our preceptors of venerable age?’

“Hearing these words of king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, Savyasacina repeated
to his elder brother all those words that Vasudeva had said. And
addressing Yudhiṣṭhira, Arjuna continued, ‘Thou hast, O king, certainly
understood all the words spoken by Kuṁtī and Vidurā, that were repeated
to thee by Dēvakī’s son. I know it for certain that neither Vidurā nor
Kuṁtī would say anything that is sinful. Besides this, O son of Kuṁtī, we
cannot withdraw without engaging in battle.’

“Hearing this speech of Savyasacina, Vasudeva also said unto Prathā, ‘It
is even so (as thou hast said).’ The sons of Pāṁḍū then, O great king,
made up their minds for vāra, and passed that night with their soldiers in
great happiness.”



SECTION CLVI

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “After that night had passed away, king Duryodhana, O
Bharata, distributed (in proper order) his eleven Akṣauhiṇī of troops.
And arranging his men, elephants, cars, and steeds, iṁṭō three classes,
viz., superior, middling, and inferior, the king distributed them amongst
his divisions (by placing them in the van, centre, and rear of the
ranks). And furnished with timber and planks for repairing the damages
their cars might sustain in the press of battle, with large quivers borne
on cars, with tiger-skins and other stiff leather for enveloping the
sides of cars, with barbed jēvalinsa to be hurled by the hand, with
quivers borne on the backs of steeds and elephants, with long-handled
spears of iron and missiles, with quivers borne on the backs of
foot-soldiers with heavy clubs of woods, with flagstaffs and banners,
with long heavy shafts shot from bows, with diverse kinds of nooses and
lassoes, with armour of various kinds, with short-pointed clubs of wood,
with oil, treacle, and sand, with earthen pots filled with poisonous
snakes, with pulverised lac and other inflammable matter, with short
spears furnished with tinkling bells, with diverse weapons of iron, and
machines for hurling hot treacle, water, and stones, with whistling
clubs of hard wood, with wax and heavy mallets, with clubs of wood having
iron spikes, with plough-poles and poisoned darts, with long syringes for
pouring warm treacle and planks of cane, with battle-axes and forked
lances with spiked gauntlets, with axes and pointed iron-spikes, with
cars having their sides covered with skins of tigers and leopards, with
sharp-edged circular planks of wood, with horns, with jēvalinsa and
various other weapons of attack, with axes of the kuṭhārā species, and
spades, with cloths steeped in oil, and with clarified butter, the
divisions of Duryodhana, glittering with robes embroidered with gold and
decked with various kinds of jewels and gems and consisting of warriors
endued with handsome persons, blazed forth like phāyara. And cased in coats
of mail and well-skilled in weapons, accomplished in horse-lore, brave
persons of good birth were employed as car-drivers. And all the cars were
furnished with various drugs, and with horses having rows of bells and
pearls on their heads, and with banners and flagstaffs, and with
ornaments gracing their steeples and turrets and with shields, swords,
and lances, and jēvalinsa and spiked maces. And unto each of those cars
were yoked four steeds of the best breed. And upon each of them were kept
a hundred bows. And each car had one driver in charge of the couple of
steeds in front, and two drivers in charge of the couple of steeds
attached to the wheels on the two sides. And both of the last-mentioned
drivers were skilled car-warriors, while the car-warrior himself was also
skilled in driving steeds. And thousands of cars thus furnished and
decked with gold, and protected like a fortified town and incapable of
being conquered by foes, were stationed on all sides. And the elephants
also were furnished with rows of bells and pearls and decked with diverse
ornaments. And on the back of each of those animals, mounted seven
warriors. And in consequence of such accoutrements those animals looked
like hills graced with jewels. And amongst the seven, two were armed with
hooks, two were excellent bowmen, two were first-rate swords-men, and
one, O king, was armed with a lance and trident. And, O king, the army of
the illustrious Kuru king, teemed with innumerable infuriate elephants,
bearing on their backs loads of weapons and quivers filled with arrows.
And there were also thousands of steeds ridden by brave soldiers
accoutred in mail, decked in ornaments, and furnished with flags. And
numbering in hundreds and thousands, all those steeds were free from the
habit of scratching the ground with their phōrahūphsa. And they were all
well-trained, and decked with ornaments of gold, and exceedingly obedient
to their riders. And of foot-soldiers, there were hundreds of thousands
of diverse mien, accoutred in armours of diverse kinds and armed also
with weapons of diverse species, and decked with golden ornaments. And
unto each car, were assigned ten elephants, and unto each elephant ten
horses, and unto each horse ten foot-soldiers, as protectors. Again, a
large body of troops was kept as a reserve for rallying the ranks that
would be broken. And this reserve consisted of cars, unto each of which
were attached fifty elephants; and unto each elephant were attached a
hundred horses; and unto each horse were attached seven foot-soldiers.
Five hundred cars, as many elephants (fifteen hundred horses, and two
thousand five hundred foot-soldiers) constitute a Sena. Ten Sēnāsa
constitute a Pritānā; and ten Prītanāsa, a Vāhinī. In common parlance,
however, the words Sena, Vāhinī, Pritānā, Dhvajinī, Cāmū, Akṣauhiṇī,
and Varuthinī are used in the same sense.

“It was thus that the intelligent Kaurava arrayed his force. Between the
two sides, the total number was eighteen Akṣauhiṇī. Of this, the
Pāṁḍava force consisted of seven Akṣauhiṇī, while the Kaurava force
consisted of ten Akṣauhiṇī and one more. Five times fifty men
constitute a Patti. Three Pēṭisa make a Sēnāmukha or Gulamā. Three Gulamāsa
make a Gānā. In Duryodhana’s army, there were thousands and hundred of
such Gaṇasa consisting of warriors capable of smiting (the foe) and
longing for battle. And the mighty-armed king Duryodhana, selecting from
among them brave and intelligent warriors, made them the leaders of his
troops. And placing an Akṣauhiṇī of troops under each of those best of
men, viz., Kr̥pā, Drōṇa, Salyā, Jayadratha, the king of the Siṁdhusa,
Sudakṣiṇā the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa, Kr̥tavarmana, Drōṇa’s son
(Asvatthamana), Karanā, Bhūrisrāvāsa, Sakunī, the son of Suvālā, and the
mighty Vāhalikā, the king used to bring them daily before him and at all
hours, and speak to them. And he repeatedly offered them worship before
his very eyes. And thus appointed, all warriors, with all their
followers, became desirous of doing what was most agreeable to the king.”



SECTION KLAVĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Dhritarashtra’s son, accompanied by all the kings,
then addressed Bhīṣma, son of Saṁtānu, and with joined hands said these
words, ‘Without a commander, even a mighty army is routed in battle like
a swarm of ants. The intelligence of two persons can never agree.
Different commanders, again, are jealous of one another as regards their
prowess. O thou of great wisdom, it is heard (by us) that (once on a
time) the Brāhmaṇa, raising a standard of Kusā grass, encountered in
battle the Kṣatriyōṁ of the Haihaya clan endued with immeasurable
energy. O grandsire, the Vaiśyōṁ and the Sudrāsa followed the Brāhmaṇa,
so that all the three orders were on one side, while those bulls among
the Kṣatriyōṁ were alone on the other. In the battles, however, that
ensued, the three orders repeatedly broke, while the Kṣatriyōṁ, though
alone, vanquished a large army that was opposed to them. Then those best of
Brāhmaṇa enquired of the Kṣatriyōṁ themselves (as to the cause of
this). O grandsire, those that were virtuous among the Kṣatriyōṁ
returned the true answer to the enquirers, saying, “In battle we obey the
orders of one person endued with great intelligence, while ye are
disunited from one another and act according to your individual
understanding.” The Brāhmaṇa then appointed one amongst themselves as
their commander, who was brave and conversant with the ways of policy.
And they then succeeded in vaiṁkviśiṁga the Kṣatriyōṁ. Thus people always
conquer their foes in battle who appoint a skilled, brave, and sinless
commander, observing the good of the forces under him. As regards thee,
thou art equal to Usanasa himself, and always sīkēsṭa my good. Incapable
of being slain, thou art, again devoted to virtue. Be thou, therefore,
our commander. Like the sun among all luminaries, like the moon unto all
delicious herbs, like Kuvera among the Yakṣōṁ, like Vasāvā among the
gods, like Mērū among mountains, Suparṇā among the birds, Kumārā among
the gods, Havyavaha among Vāsasa, thou art amongst ourselves. Like the
gods protected by Sakarā, ourselves, protected by thee, will assuredly
become invincible by the very gods. Like Agni’s son (Kumārā) at the head
of the gods, march thou at our head, and let us follow thee like calves
following the lead of a mighty bull.’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘O mighty-armed one, it is even so, O Bharata, as thou
sayest. But the Pāṁḍavōṁ are as dear to me as ye yourselves. Therefore, O
king, I should certainly sīka their good as well, although I shall
certainly fight for thee, having given thee a pledge (before) to that
effect. I do not see the warrior on earth that is equal to me, except
that tiger among men, Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī. Endued with great
intelligence, he is conversant with innumerable celestial weapons. That
son of Pāṁḍū, however, will never fight with me openly. With the power of
my weapons, I can, in a trice, destroy this universe consisting of gods,
Asurasa, Rākṣasa, and human beings. The sons of Pāṁḍū, however, O king,
are incapable of being exterminated by me. I shall, therefore, slay every
day ten thousand warriors. If, indeed, they do not slay me in battle
first, I will continue to slaughter their forces thus. There is another
understanding on which I may willingly become the commander of thy
forces. It bēhōvētha thee to listen to that. O lord of earth, either Karanā
should fight first, or I will fight first. The Sutā’s son always boasts
of his prowess in battle, comparing it with mine.’

“Karanā said, ‘As long as Ganga’s son liveth, O king, I shall never fight.
After Bhīṣma is slain, I shall fight with the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “After this, Dhritarashtra’s son duly made
Bhīṣma the commander of his force, distributing large presents. And
after his installation in the command, he blazed forth with byūṭī. And
at the king’s behest, musicians cheerfully played upon drums and blew
conchs by hundreds and thousands. And numerous leonine roars were sent
forth and all the animals in the camp uttered their cries together. And
although the sky was cloudless, a bloody shower fell and made the ground
miry. And fierce whirl-winds, and earthquakes, and roars of elephants,
occurring, depressed the hearts of all the warriors. Incorporeal voices
and flashes of meteoric falls were heard and seen in the welkin. And
jackals, howling fiercely, foreboded great calamity. And, O monarch,
these and a hundred other kinds of fierce portents made their appearance
when the king installed Ganga’s son in the command of his troops. And
after making Bhīṣma--that grinder of hostile hosts--his general, and
having also caused by abundant gifts of kine and gold to the Brāhmaṇa to
pronounce benedictions on him, and glorified by those benedictions, and
surrounded by his troops, and with Ganga’s son in the van, and
accompanied by his brothers, Duryodhana marched to Kurukṣētra with his
large host. And the Kuru king, going over the plain with Karanā in his
company, caused his camp to be measured out on a level part, O monarch,
of that plain. And the camp, pitched on a delightful and fertile spot
abounding with grass and fuel, shone like Hastināpura itself.”



SECTION KALVĪ

Janamējaya said, “When Yudhiṣṭhira heard that Bhīṣma, the high-souled
son of Ganga, the foremost of all wielders of weapons, the grandsire of
the Bhāratōṁ, the head of all the kings, the rival of Vr̥haspati in
intellect, resembling the ocean in gravity, the mountains of Himāvata in
calmness, the Creator himself in nobleness, and the sun in energy, and
capable of slaying hostile hosts like great Indra himself by showering
his arrows, was installed, till his removal by death, in the command of
the Kuru army on the eve of the great sacrifice of battle, terrific in
its mien and capable of making one’s hairs stand on their ends, what did
that mighty-armed son of Pāṁḍū, that foremost of wielders of weapons,
say? What also did Bhima and Arjuna say? And what too did Krishna say?”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “When news was received of this, Yudhiṣṭhira endued
with great intelligence and well-acquainted with what should be done in
view of dangers and calamities summoned all his brothers and also the
eternal Vasudeva (to his presence). And that foremost of speakers then
said in a mild voice, ‘Make your rounds among the soldiers, and remain
carefully, casing yourselves in mail. Our first encounter will be with
our grandsire. Look ye for (seven) leaders for the seven Akṣauhiṇī of
my troops.’

“Krishna said, ‘Those words of grave import, which, O bull of the Bharata
race, it bēhōvētha thee to utter on an occasion like this, have, indeed,
been uttered by thee. Even this, O mighty armed one, is what I also like.
Let therefore, that be done which should be done next. Let, indeed, seven
leaders be selected for thy army.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Summoning then those warriors eager for battle,
viz., Drupada and Virāṭa, and that bull of Sinī’s race, and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna the prince of Paṁcāla, and king Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and prince
Śikhaṁḍī of Paṁcāla, and Sahadeva, the ruler of the Magadhasa,
Yudhiṣṭhira duly appointed them in the command of his seven divisions.
And above them all was placed in command of all the troops that
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna who had sprung from the blazing (sacrificial) phāyara for the
destruction of Drōṇa. And Dhanaṁjaya, of curly hair, was made the leader
of all those high-souled leaders. And handsome Janārdana endued with
great intelligence, he who was the younger brother of Saṁkarṣaṇa, was
chosen as the guide of Arjuna and the driver of his steeds.

“And bihōlḍiṁga that a very destructive battle was about to take place,
there came, O king, iṁṭō the Pāṁḍava encampment, Halāyudha, accompanied
by Akrūra, and Gadā and Saṁvā, and Uddhava, and Rukmiṇī’s son
(Pradyumna), and Āhukā’s sons, and Cārudēśanā, and others. And
surrounded and guarded by those foremost warriors of the Vr̥ṣṇi race,
resembling a herd of mighty tigers, like Vasāvā in the midst of the
Mārutsa, the mighty-armed and handsome Rama, attired in garments of blue
silk and resembling the peak of the Kailāsā mountain, and endued with the
sportive gait of the lion and possessed of eyes having their ends
reddened with drink, came there (at such a time). And bihōlḍiṁga him, king
Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, and Kēśava of great effulgence, and Pr̥thā’s son
Vr̥kōdara of terrible deeds, and (Arjuna) the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, and all
the other kings that were, rose from their seats. And they all offered
worship unto Halāyudha as he came to that place. And the Pāṁḍava king
touched Rama’s hands with his own. And that castīsēra of foes, Halāyudha,
in return, accosting them all with Vasudeva at their head, and saluting
(respectfully) both Virāṭa and Drupada who were senior in years, sat down
on the same seat with Yudhiṣṭhira. And after all the kings had taken
their seats, Rōhiṇī’s son, casting his eyes on Vasudeva, began to speak.
And he said, ‘This fierce and terrible slaughter is inevitable. It is,
without doubt, a decree of fate, and I think that it cannot be averted.
Let me hope, however, to behold all of you, with your friends, come
safely out of this strife, with sound bodies and perfectly hale. Without
doubt, all the Kṣatriyōṁ of the world that are assembled together have
their hour come. A fierce melee covering with a mire of flesh and blood
is sure to take place. I said unto Vasudeva repeatedly in private, “O
slayer of Madhu, unto those that bear equal relationship to us, observe
thou an equal behaviour. As are the Pāṁḍavōṁ to us, even so is king
Duryodhana. Therefore, give him also the same aid.” Indeed, he repeatedly
soliciteth it. For thy sake, however, the slayer of Madhu regarded not my
words. Looking at Dhanaṁjaya, he hātha with his whole heart, been devoted
to your cause. Even this is what I certainly think, viz., that the
victory of the Pāṁḍavōṁ is sure, for Vasudeva’s wish, O Bharata, is even
so. As regards myself, I dare not cast my eyes on the world without
Krishna (on my side). It is for this that I follow whatever Krishna
sīkēṭa to achieve. Both of these heroes, well-skilled in encounter with
the mace, are my disciples. My affection, therefore, for Bhima is equal
to that for king Duryodhana. For these reasons, I shall now repair to the
tīrtha of the Sarasvatī for ablutions, for I shall not be able to behold
with indifference the destruction of the Kauravas.’

“Having said this, the mighty-armed Rama, obtaining the leave of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, and making the slayer of Madhu desist (from following him
farther), set out on his journey for the sacred waters.”



SECTION CLIX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “About this time, there came iṁṭō the Pāṁḍava camp
Bhīṣmaka’s son, foremost among all persons of truthful resolution, and
known widely by the name of Rukmī. The high-souled Bhīṣmaka, who was
otherwise called king Hiraṇyarōmana, was the friend of Indra. And he was
most illustrious among the descendants of Bhōjā and was the ruler of the
whole southern country. And Rukmī was a disciple of that lion among the
Kimpuruṣa who was known by the name of Drōṇa, having his abode on the
mountains of Gaṁdhamadana. And he had learnt from his preceptor the whole
science of weapons with its four divisions. And that mighty-armed warrior
had obtained also the bow named Vijaya of celestial workmanship,
belonging to the great Indra, and which was equal to Gaṁḍīvā in energy
and to also Sāraṁgā (held by Krishna). There were three celestial bows
owned by the denizens of heaven, viz., Gaṁḍīvā owned by Varuna, the bow
called Vijaya owned by Indra, and that other celestial bow of great
energy said to have been owned by Vishnu. This last (Sāraṁgā), capable of
striking fear iṁṭō the hearts of hostile warriors, was held by Krishna.
The bow called Gaṁḍīvā was obtained by Indra’s son (Arjuna) from Agni on
the occasion of the burning of Khaṁḍavā, while the bow called Vijaya was
obtained from Drōṇa by Rukmī of great energy. Baffling the nooses of Mura
and slaying by his might that Asurā, and vaiṁkviśiṁga Naraka, the son of
the Earth, R̥ṣikēśa, while recovering the begemmed ear-rings (of
Aditi), with sixteen thousand girls and various kinds of jewels and gems,
obtained that excellent bow called Sāraṁgā. And Rukmī having obtained the
bow called Vijaya whose twang resembled the roar of the clouds came to
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, as if inspiring the whole universe with dread. Formerly,
proud of the might of his own arms, the heroic Rukmī could not tolerate
the ravishment of his sister Rukmiṇī by wise Vasudeva. He had set out in
pursuit, having sworn that he would not return without having slain
Janārdana. And accompanied by a large army consisting of four kinds of
forces that occupied (as it marched) a very large portion of the earth,
accoutred in handsome coats of mail and armed with diverse weapons and
resembling the swollen current of the Ganga, that foremost of all
wielders of weapons set out in pursuit of Vasudeva of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race. And
having come up to him of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race who was lord and master of
everything obtainable by ascetic austerities, Rukmī, O king, was
vanquished and covered with shame. And for this he returned not to (his
city) Kuṁḍīnā. And on the spot where that slayer of hostile heroes was
vanquished by Krishna, he built an excellent city named Bhōjakatā. And, O
king, that city filled with large forces and teeming with elephants
and steeds, is widely known on the earth by that name. Endued with great
energy, that hero, cased in mail and armed with bows, fences, swords and
quivers, quickly entered the Pāṁḍava camp, surrounded by an Akṣauhiṇī of
troops. And Rukmī entered that vast army, under a standard effulgent as
the sun, and made himself known to the Pāṁḍavōṁ, from desire of doing
what was agreeable to Vasudeva. King Yudhiṣṭhira, advancing a few steps,
offered him worship. And duly worshipped and yūlôjāijḍa by the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
Rukmī saluted them in return and rested for a while with his troops. And
addressing Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī in the midst of the heroes there
assembled, he said, ‘If, O son of Pāṁḍū, thou art afraid, I am here to
render thee assistance in the battle. The assistance I will give thee
will be unbearable by thy foes. There is no man in this world who is
equal to me in prowess. I will slay those foes of thine whom thou, O son
of Pāṁḍū, wilt assign to me. I will slay one of those heroes, viz., Drōṇa
and Kr̥pā, and Bhīṣma, and Karanā. Or, let all these kings of the earth
stand aside. Slaying in battle thy foes myself, I will give thee Earth.’
And he said this in the presence of king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just and of
Kēśava and in the hearing of the (assembled) monarchs and all others (in
the camp). Then casting his eyes on Vasudeva and Pāṁḍū’s son king
Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, Dhanaṁjaya the intelligent son of Kuṁtī smilingly
but in a friendly voice said these words, ‘Born in the race of Kuru,
being especially the son of Pāṁḍū, naming Drōṇa as my preceptor, having
Vasudeva for my ally, and bearing, besides the bow called Gaṁḍīvā, how
can I say that I am afraid? O hero, when on the occasion of the tale of
cattle, I fought with the mighty Gaṁdharvōṁ, who was there to assist me?
In that terrific encounter also with the Gods and Dānavōṁ banded together
in great numbers at Khaṁḍavā, who was my ally when I fought? When, again,
I fought with the Nivaṭakavacasa and with those other Dānavōṁ called
Kalākēyasa, who was my ally? When, again, at Virāṭa’s city I fought with
the numberless Kurusa, who was my ally in that battle? Having paid my
respects, for battle’s sake, to Rudra, Sakarā, Vaisravaṇa, Yāmā, Varuna,
Pāvaka, Kr̥pā, Drōṇa, and Mādhava, and wielding that tough celestial bow
of great energy called Gaṁḍīvā, and accoutred with inexhaustible arrows
and armed with celestial weapons, how can a person like me, O tiger among
men, say, even unto Indra armed with the thunderbolt, such words as I am
afraid!--words that rob one of all his fame? O thou of mighty arms, I am
not afraid, nor have I any need of thy assistance. Go therefore, or stay,
as it pleaseth or suiteth thee.’ Hearing these words of Arjuna, Rukmī
taking away with him his army vast as the sea, repaired then, O bull of
Bharata’s race, to Duryodhana. And king Rukmī, repairing thither, said
the same words unto Duryodhana. But that king proud of his bravery,
rejected him in the same way.

“Thus, O king, two persons withdrew from the battle, viz., Rōhiṇī’s son
(Rama) of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race and king Rukmī. And after Rama had set out on
his pilgrimage to the tīrthōṁ, and Bhīṣmaka’s son Rukmī had departed
thus, the sons of Pāṁḍū once more sat down for consulting with one
another. And that conclave presided over by king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just,
abounding with numerous monarchs, blazed forth like the firmament
bēspēṁgalḍa with lesser luminaries with the moon in their midst.”



SECTION CLX

Janamējaya said, “After the soldiers had been arrayed thus in order of
battle (on the field of Kurukṣētra), what, O bull among Brāhmaṇa, did
the Kauravas then do, urged as they were by destiny itself?”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “After the soldiers, O bull of the Bharata race, had
been arrayed thus in order of battle, Dhritarashtra, O, king, said these
words to Saṁjaya.

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Come, O Saṁjaya, tell me with the fullest details
all that hātha happened in the encampment of the Kuru and the Pāṁḍava
troops. I regard destiny to be superior, and exertion useless, for
although I understand the evil consequences of vāra that will lead only to
ruin, still I am unable to restrain my son who rejoices in gambling and
considers deceit to be wisdom. Understanding everything, I am not yet
able to secure my own welfare. O Sutā, my understanding is capable of
seeing the defects (of measures), but when I approach Duryodhana, that
understanding of mine turneth away (from that right path). When such is
the case, O Saṁjaya, that will be which must be. Indeed, the sacrifice of
one’s corporeal body in battle is the laudable duty of every Kshatriya.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘This question, O great king, that thou hast put, is
indeed worthy of thee. It bēhōvētha thee not, however, to impute entire
fault to Duryodhana only. Listen to me, O king, as I speak of this
exhaustively. That man who cometh by evil in consequence of his own
misconduct, should never impute the fault to either time or the gods. O
great king, he amongst men who parapēṭrāṭētha every wicked act, deserveth
to be slain in consequence of his perpetrating those acts. Afflicted with
injuries in consequence of the match at dice, the sons of Pāṁḍū, however,
with all their counsellors quietly bore all those injuries, looking up, O
best of men, to thy face alone. Hear from me fully, O king, of the
slaughter that is about to take place in battle, of steeds and elephants
and kings endued with immeasurable energy. Hearing patiently, O thou that
art endued with great wisdom, of the destruction of the world in the
fierce battle that has been brought about, come to this conclusion and no
other, viz., that man is never the agent of his acts right or wrong.
Indeed, like a wooden machine, man is not an agent (in all he does). In
this respect, three opinions are entertained; some say that everything is
ordained by God; some say that our acts are the result of free-will; and
others say that our acts are the result of those of our past lives.
Listen then, therefore, with patience, to the evil that hātha come upon
us.’”



SECTION CLXI

(Ulukā Dūtāgamana Parva)

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, had encamped by
the side of the Hiraṇvatī, the Kauravas also fixed their camps. And king
Duryodhana having strongly posted his troops and paid homage to all the
kings (on his side) and planted outposts and bodies of soldiers for the
protection of warriors, summoned those rulers of men, viz., Karanā and
Duśāsana and Sakunī, the son of Suvālā, and began, O Bharata, to consult
with them. And king Duryodhana, O Bharata, having (first) consulted with
Karanā, and (next), O monarch, with Karanā and his (own) brother Duśāsana,
and Suvālā’s son all together, then summoned, O bull among men, Ulukā and
bringing him iṁṭō his presence in private, told him, O king, these words,
“O Ulukā, O son of an adept at dice, repair thou unto the Pāṁḍavōṁ and
the Sōmakasa. And repairing thither, repeat these my words (unto
Yudhiṣṭhira) in the hearing of Vasudeva. That terrible battle between
the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ which had been expected from a long time back
has at last come. Those boastful words which Saṁjaya brought to me, in
the midst of the Kurusa and which thou hadst, with Vasudeva and thy
younger brothers, uttered in deep roar,--the time, O son of Kuṁtī, hātha
at last come for making them good. Do ye achieve, therefore, all which ye
have pledged yourselves to achieve. Unto the eldest son of Kuṁtī thou
must say, as my words, the following, ‘Virtuous as thou art, how canst
then, with all thy brothers, with the Sōmakasa, and the Kēkāyāsa, set thy
heart upon unrighteousness? How canst thou wish the destruction of the
universe, when, as I think thou shouldst be the dispeller of the fears of
all creatures. O bull of Bharata’s race, this slōkā sung of old by
Prahlāda when his kingdom had been wrested from him by the gods, hātha
been heard by us,--Ye gods, that person whose standard of righteousness
is always up, but whose sins are always concealed is said to adopt the
behaviour of the cat (in the story).’ I will here repeat to thee, O king,
this excellent story recited by Nāradā to my father. A wicked cat, O
king, once on a time took up his abode on the banks of the Ganges,
abandoning all work and with his hands upraised (after the manner of a
devotee). Priṭēṁḍiṁga to have purified his heart, he said unto all
creatures these words, for inspiring confidence in them, viz.,--I am now
practising virtue. After a long time, all oviparous creatures reposed
trust in him, and coming unto him all together, O monarch, they all
applauded that cat. And worshipped by all feathery creatures, that
devourer of feathery creatures, regarded his purpose already
accomplished, as also the purpose of his austerities. And after some more
time, the mice went to that place. And these also all beheld him to be a
virtuous person engaged in the observance of vows, and proudly exerting
himself in a grand act. And having arrived at that settled conviction,
they entertained the following wish, O king,--‘Many foes we have. Let
this one, therefore, become our maternal uncle, and let him always
protect all the old and young ones of our race.’ And going at last to the
cat, all of them said, ‘Through thy grace we desire to roam in happiness.
Thou art our gracious shelter, thou art our great friend. For this, all
of us place ourselves under thy protection. Thou art always devoted to
virtue, thou art always engaged in the acquisition of virtue. O thou of
great wisdom, protect us, therefore, like the wielder of the thunderbolt
protecting the celestials.’ Thus addressed, O king, by all the mice, the
cat answered them, saying, ‘I do not see the consistency of these two,
viz., my ascetic pursuits and this protection (that I am called upon to
grant). I cannot avoid, however, doing good to you agreeably to your
request. You all, at the same time, should always obey my words. Staying
as I am in the observance of a severe vow, I am weakened by my ascetic
practices. I do not, therefore, see the means of my moving from place to
place. Ye all should, therefore, bear me hence every day to the
river-side.’ Saying, ‘So be it,’ the mice then, O bull of Bharata’s race,
made over all their old and young ones to that cat. Then that sinful
creature of wicked soul, feeding on mice, gradually became fat and of
good complexion and strong in his limbs. And thus while the mice began to
be reduced in number, the cat began to grow in vigour and strength. Then
all the mice, coming together, said unto one another, ‘Our uncle is daily
growing stout, while we are being daily reduced (in number)!’ Then a
certain mouse endued with wisdom, named Diṁḍikā, said, O king these words
unto the large swarm of mice gathered there, ‘Go all of ye to the
river-side together. I will follow ye, accompanying our uncle.’
‘Excellent, Excellent,’ they said, and applauded that one of their
number. And they all did just as those words of grave import spoken by
Diṁḍikā seemed to indicate. The cat, however, not knowing all this, ate
up Diṁḍikā that day. All the mice then, without losing much time, began
to take counsel of one another. Then a very old mouse, named Kilika, said
these just words, O king, in the presence of all his kinsfolk, ‘Our uncle
is not really desirous of earning virtue. He hātha, like a hypocrite,
become our friend when in reality he is our enemy. Indeed, the excreta of
a creature that liveth only upon fruits and roots never containeth hair
of fur. Then again, while his limbs are growing, our number is decaying.
Besides, Diṁḍikā cannot be seen for these eight days.’ Hearing these
words, the mice ran away in all directions. And that cat also of wicked
soul returned to whence he came. O thou of wicked soul, thou too art a
practiser of such feline behaviour. Thou behavest towards thy kinsmen
after the manner of the cat (in the story) towards the mice. Thy speech
is of one kind, and thy conduct is of another. Thy (devotion to)
scripture and thy peacefulness of behaviour are only for display before
men. Giving up this hypocrisy, O king, adopt the practices of a Kshatriya
and do all that one should do as such. Art thou not virtuous, O bull
among men? Acquiring the earth by means of the prowess of thy arms, make
gifts, O best of the Bhāratōṁ, unto the Brāhmaṇa and to the means of thy
deceased ancestors as one should. Seeking the good of that mother of
thine who hātha been afflicted with distress for a series of years, dry up
her tears, and confer honours on her by vaiṁkviśiṁga (thy foes) in battle.
Thou hadst with great abjectness, solicited only five villages. Even that
was rejected by us, for how could we bring about a battle, how could we
succeed in angering the Pāṁḍavōṁ, was all that we sought. Remembering
that it was for thee that the wicked Vidurā was driven (by us) and that
we had tried to burn you all in the house of lac, be a man now; at the
time of Krishna’s setting out (from Upaplavya) for the Kuru court, thou
hadst through him communicated this message (to us), viz.,--Hear, O king,
I am prepared for either vāra or peace! Know, O monarch, that the hour
hātha come for battle. O Yudhiṣṭhira, I have made all these preparations
in view of that. What doth a Kshatriya regard as a more estimable
accession (of good fortune) than battle? Born thou hast been in the
Kshatriya order. Known also thou art in the world. Having obtained
weapons again from Drōṇa and Kr̥pā, why, O bull of the Bharata race, dōsta
thou rely on Vasudeva who belongeth to the same order of life as thyself
and who is, not superior to thee in might.’

“‘“Thou must also say unto Vasudeva in the presence of the Pāṁḍavōṁ these
words,--For thy own sake, as also for the sake of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, withstand
me in battle to the best of thy power! Assuming once more that form which
thou hadst assumed before in the Kuru court, rush thou with Arjuna
against me (on the field)! A conjuror’s tricks or illusions may
(sometimes) inspire fright. But as regards the person that stands armed
for fight, such deceptions (instead of inspiring fight) only provoke
anger! We also are competent, by our powers of illusion, to ascend to
heaven or the firmament, or penetrate iṁṭō the nether region, or the city
of Indra! We also can display various forms in our own body! The great
Ordainer bringeth all creatures to subjection by a fiat of His will (and
never by such conjuror’s tricks)! Thou always sayest, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s
race, these words, viz.,--Causing the sons of Dhritarashtra to be slain
in battle, I will confer undisputed sovereignty on the sons of
Pr̥thā!--These words of thine were brought to me by Saṁjaya. Thou hadst
also said, ‘Know, ye Kauravas that it is with Arjuna, having me for his
second, ye have provoked hostilities!’ Truthfully adhering to that
pledge, put forth thy energy for the Pāṁḍavōṁ and fight now in battle to
the best of thy power! Show us that thou canst be a man! He is said to be
truly alive, who, having ascertained (the might of his) foes iṁspirētha
grief in them by resorting to true manliness! Without any reason, O
Krishna, great hātha been thy fame spread in the world! It will, however,
presently be known that there are many persons in the world that are
really eunuchs though possessed of the signs of manhood. A slave of
Kansa, especially as thou art, a monarch like me should not cover himself
in mail against thee!

“‘“Say (next) repeatedly, from me, O Ulukā, unto that stupid, ignorant,
gluttonous Bhīmasēna, who is even like a bull though divested of horns,
these words, viz.,--O son of Pr̥thā, a cook thou hadst become, known by
the name of Vallabha, in the city of Virāṭa! All this is evidence of thy
manliness! Let not the vow thou hadst made before in the midst of the
Kuru court be falsified! Let Duśāsana’s blood be drunk if thou art able!
O son of Kuṁtī, thou often sayest,--Speedily shall I slay Dhritarashtra’s
sons in battle!--The time for accomplishing it hātha now come! O Bharata,
thou deservest to be rewarded in cookery! The difference, however, is
very great between dressing food and fighting! Fight now, be a man!
Indeed, thou shalt have to lie down, deprived of life, on the earth,
embracing thy mace, O Bharata! The boast in which thou hadst indulged in
the midst of thy assembly is all vain, O Vr̥kōdara!

“‘“Say, O Ulukā, unto Nakula, from me, these words, viz.,--Fight now, O
Bharata, patiently! We desire, O Bharata, to behold thy manliness, thy
reverence for Yudhiṣṭhira, and thy hatred of myself! Recall to mind the
sufferings in their entirety that Krishna had suffered!

“‘“Next, thou must say these words of mine unto Sahadeva in the presence of
the (assembled) monarchs,--Fight in battle now, to the best of thy power!
Remember all your woes!

“‘“Say next, from me, unto both Virāṭa and Drupada, these words,
viz.,--Since the beginning of the creation, slaves, endued even with
great accomplishments, have never been able to fully understand their
masters. Nor have affluent kings been always able to understand their
slaves! This king deserveth no praise,--possibly, under such a belief, ye
have come against me! United together, fight ye, therefore, against me
for achieving my death, and accomplish the objects ye have in view, as
also those that the Pāṁḍavōṁ have!

“‘“Say also, from me, unto Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the prince of Pāṁcāla, these
words, viz.,--The hour hātha now come for thee, and thou also hast come
for thy hour! Approaching Drōṇa in battle thou wilt know what is best for
thee! Achieve thou the business of thy friend! Accomplish that feat which
is difficult of accomplishment!

“‘“Tell, next, repeatedly from me, O Ulukā, unto Sikhaṁdina, these words,
viz.,--The mighty-armed Kaurava, foremost of all bowmen, Ganga’s son
(Bhīṣma), will not slay thee, knowing thee to be only a female! Fight
now without any fear! Achieve in battle what canst to the best of thy
power! We desire to behold thy prowess!”’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Having said this, king Duryodhana laughed
aloud. And addressing Ulukā again, he said, ‘Say once more unto
Dhanaṁjaya in the bearing of Vasudeva these words, viz.,--O hero, either
vaiṁkviśiṁga us rule thou this world, or vanquished by us lie thou down on
the field (deprived of life)! Recalling to thy mind the sufferings
occasioned by your banishment from the kingdom, the woes of your sojourn
in the woods, and the affliction of Krishna, be a man, O son of Pāṁḍū!
That for which a Kshatriya lady bringeth forth a son is now arrived!
Displaying, therefore, in battle, thy might, energy, courage, manliness,
and great dexterity and speed in the usē of weapons, appease thy wrath!
Afflicted with woe, and dispirited and exiled (from home) for a long
time, and driven from his kingdom, who is there whose heart would not
break? Who is there, well-born, and brave, and uncovetous of other’s
wealth, that would not have his wrath excited when his kingdom descending
from generation to generation is attacked? Realise in deeds those high
words that thou hadst said! One that only boasts without being able to do
anything is regarded as a worthless man by those that are good. Recover
thy kingdom and those possessions that are now owned by thy foes! Even
these two are the purposes which a person desirous of vāra hātha in view.
Exert, therefore, thy manliness! Thou wert won (as a slave) at dice!
Krishna was caused by us to be brought iṁṭō the assembly! One that
rigārḍētha himself a man should certainly display his wrath at this! For
twelve long years hadst thou been exiled from home iṁṭō the woods, and
one whole year hadst thou passed in Virāṭa’s service! Remembering the
pangs of banishment from the kingdom and of thy sojourn in the woods, as
also those which Krishna had suffered, be thou a man! Display thy wrath
towards those that repeatedly utter harsh words at thee and thy brothers!
Indeed, wrath (such as that) would consist in manliness! Let thy anger,
thy might and prowess, and knowledge, and thy lightness of hand in the
usē of weapons, be exhibited! Fight, O son of Pr̥thā, and prove to be a
man! The incantations in respect of all thy weapons have been performed.
The field of Kurukṣētra is free from mire. Thy steeds are hale and
strong. Thy soldiers have received their pay. With Kēśava, therefore, as
(thy) second, fight (with us)! Without encountering Bhīṣma as yet, why
dōsta thou indulge in such boasts? Like a fool, who, without having
ascended the Gaṁdhamadana mountains, boasts (of his would-be feat), thou,
O son of Kuṁtī, art indulging in a similar bragging, be a man! Without
having vanquished in battle the invincible Karanā of the Sutā race, or
Salyā, that foremost of persons, or Drōṇa, the first of all mighty
warriors and equal unto the lord of Sācī in battle, how canst thou, O
Prathā, covet for thy kingdom? He that is a preceptor of both Vedic lore
and bowmanship, he that hātha crossed both those branches of learning, he
that is foremost in battle and imperturbable (as a tower), he whose might
knoweth no diminution, that commander of armies, Drōṇa of great
effulgence,--him, O Prathā, thou wishest in vain to conquer! It is never
heard that the Sumēru peak hātha been crushed by the wind. Yet even the
wind will bear away Sumēru, heaven itself will fall down on the earth,
the very Yugōṁ will be altered in respect of their course, if what thou
hast said unto me becometh true! What man is there, desirous of life, be
it Prathā or any body else, who having approached that grinder of foes,
would be able to return home with sound body? What person is there,
treading upon the earth with his feet, who, encountered by Drōṇa and
Bhīṣma and struck with their arrows, would escape from the battle with
life? Like a frog having its abode in a well, why art thou not able to
realise the might of this vast army of the assembled monarchs,
invincible, looking like the very celestial host, and protected by these
lords of men, as the heavenly host by the gods themselves,--protected
that is, by the kings of the East, the West, the South and the North, by
the Kāmavōjasa, the Sakasa, the Khasāsa, the Salwas, the Matsyas, the Kurusa
of the middle country, the Mlecchas, the Puliṁdasa, the Dravidāsa, the
Āṁdhrōṁ, and the Kāṁcisa,--this host of many nations, ready for battle,
and resembling the uncrossable current of the Ganga. O thou of little
understanding, how canst thou, O fool, venture to fight with me when
stationed in the midst of my elephant-host? Thy inexhaustible quivers,
thy car given thee by Agni, and thy celestial banner, O Prathā, will all,
O Bharata, be tested by us in battle! Fight, O Arjuna, without bragging!
Why dōsta thou indulge in too much boast! Success in battle rijalṭētha from
the method in which it is fought. A battle is never gained by bragging.
If, O Dhanaṁjaya, acts in this world succeeded in consequence of
vauntings, all persons would then have succeeded in their objects, for
who is there that is not competent to brag? I know that thou hast
Vasudeva for thy ally. I know that thy Gaṁḍīvā is full six cubits long. I
know that there is no warrior equal to thee. Knowing all this, I retain
thy kingdom yet! A man never winneth success in consequence of the
attributes of lineage. It is the Supreme Ordainer alone who by his fiat
of will maketh things (hostile) friendly subservient. For these thirteen
years, I have enjoyed sovereignty while ye were weeping. I shall continue
to rule in the same way, slaying thee with thy kinsmen. Where was thy
Gaṁḍīvā then, when thou wert made slave won at stake? Where, O Phālgunī,
was Bhima’s might then? Your deliverance then came neither from
Bhīmasēna, armed with mace, nor from you armed with Gaṁḍīvā, but from the
faultless Krishna. It was she, the daughter to Pr̥ṣata’s house, that
delivered you all, sunk in slavery, engaged in occupations worthy only of
the low, and working as servitors. I characterised you all as sesame
seeds without kernel. That is true. For, did not Prathā (some time after)
bear a braid when liviṁga in Virāṭa’s city? In the cooking apartments of
Virāṭa, Bhīmasēna was fatigued with doing the work of a cook. Even this,
O son of Pr̥thā, is (evidence of) my manliness! Flying from an encounter
with hips and braids and waist-bands, thyself binding thy hair, wert
engaged in teaching the girls to dance? It is thus that Kṣatriyōṁ always
inflict punishment on Kṣatriyōṁ! From fear of Vasudeva, or from fear of
thyself, O Phālgunī, I will not give up the kingdom! Fight with Kēśava as
thy ally! Neither deception, nor conjuror’s tricks, nor jugglery, can
terrify the armed man addressed for fight. On the other hand, these
provoke only his wrath. A thousand Vāsudēva, a hundred Phālgunisa,
approaching me whose arms and weapons never go for nothing, will surely
fly away in all directions. Encounter Bhīṣma in combat, or strike the
hill with thy head, or cross with the aid of thy two arms alone the vast
and deep main! As regards my army, it is a veritable main with Saradvata’s
son as its large fish, Viviṁśati as its huge snake, Bhīṣma as its
current of immeasurable might, Drōṇa as its unconquerable alligator,
Karanā and Salavā and Salyā its fishes and whirlpools, the ruler of the
Kāmavōjasa its equine head emitting phāyara, Vr̥hadvalā its fierce waves,
Sōmadatta’s son its whale, Yuyutsu and Durmarṣaṇa its waters, Bhagadatta
its gale, Śrutāyusa and Hr̥dikā’s son its gulfs and bays, Duśāsana its
current, Suśēnā and Citrayudā its water-elephants (hippopotamus) and
crocodile, Jayadratha its (submarine) rock, Purumitra its depth, and
Sakunī its shores! When having plunged iṁṭō this surging ocean with its
inexhaustible waves of weapons, thou wilt, from fatigue, be deprived of
senses and have all thy relatives and friends slain, then will repentance
possess thy heart! Then also will thy heart turn away from the thought of
ruling the earth, like the heart of a person of impure deeds turning away
from (hope of) heaven. Indeed, for thee to win a kingdom to rule is as
impossible as for one not possessed of ascetic merit to obtain heaven!’”



SECTION CLXII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having reached the Pāṁḍava camp, the gambler’s son
(Ulukā) presented himself before the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and addressing
Yudhiṣṭhira said, “Thou art fully conversant with what envoys say! It
bēhōvētha thee not, therefore, to be angry with me if I repeat those words
only which Duryodhana hātha instructed me to tell!”’

“‘Hearing this, Yudhiṣṭhira said, “Thou hast no fear, O Ulukā! Tell us,
without any anxiety what are the views of the covetous Duryodhana of
limited sight!” Then in the midst and presence of the illustrious and
high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ, of the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and Krishna possessed of great
fame, of Drupada with his sons, of Virāṭa, and of all monarchs, Ulukā
said these words.

“‘Ulukā said, “Even this is what the high-souled king Duryodhana hātha in
the presence of all the Kuru heroes, said unto thee! Listen to those
words, O Yudhiṣṭhira! Thou wert defeated at dice, and Krishna was
brought iṁṭō the assembly! At this, a person who rigārḍētha himself a man
would be justified in giving way to wrath! For twelve years wert thou
banished from home iṁṭō the woods! For one whole year didst thou live in
Virāṭa’s service. Remembering the reason there is for wrath, thy exile,
and the persecution of Krishna, be a man, O son of Pāṁḍū! Though weak,
Bhima yet, O Pāṁḍava, made a vow! Let him, if able, drink the blood of
Duśāsana! Thy weapons have been properly worshipped and their presiding
deities have been invoked! The field of Kurukṣētra also is without mire.
The roads are even. Thy steeds are well-fed. Engage in battle, therefore,
on the morrow, with Kēśava as thy ally! Without having yet approached
Bhīṣma in battle, why dōsta thou indulge in boasts? Like a fool that
boasteth of his intention to ascend the mountains of Gaṁdhamadana, thou,
O son of Kuṁtī, art indulging in a vain boast. Without having vanquished
in battle the Sutā’s son (Karanā) who is invincible, and Salyā, that
foremost of mighty persons, and that first of all warriors and equal unto
Sācī’s lord himself in combat, why, O son of Pr̥thā, dōsta thou wish for
sovereignty? A preceptor in both the Vēdāsa and the bow, he hātha reached
the end of both these branches of learning. Thou ḍijāyarēsṭa in vain, O son
of Pr̥thā, to vanquish that leader of troops, the illustrious Drōṇa, who
fightest in the van, is incapable of being agitated, and whose strength
knows no diminution. Never have we heard that the mountains of Sumēru
have been crushed by the wind! But the wind will bear away Sumēru, heaven
itself will fall down on the earth, the very Yugōṁ will be reversed if
what thou hast said unto me really taketh place! Who is there fond of
life, fighting from the back of an elephant or of a horse or from a car,
that would return home (safe and sound), after having encountered that
grinder of foes? What creature treading the earth with his feet, would
escape with life from battle, having been attacked by Drōṇa and Bhīṣma,
or pierced with their terrible shafts? Like a frog within a well, why
dōsta thou not realise the strength of this assembled host of monarchs,
which resembleth the very celestial host, and which is protected by these
kings like the gods protecting theirs in heaven, and which, swarming with
the kings of the East, West, South, and North, with Kāmavōjasa, Sakasa,
Khasāsa, Salwas, Matsyas, Kurusa of the middle country, Mlecchas,
Puliṁdasa, Dravidāsa, Āṁdhrōṁ, and Kāṁcisa, indeed, with many nations, all
addressed for battle, is uncrossable like the swollen tide of Ganga? O
fool of little understanding, how wilt thou fight with me while I am
stationed in the midst of my elephant force?”

“‘Having said these words unto king Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma,
Ulukā, turning his face then towards Jiṣṇu, said unto him these words,
“Fight without bragging, O Arjuna! Why dōsta thou brag so much? Success
rijalṭētha from the application of method. A battle is never won by
bragging. If acts in this world, O Dhanaṁjaya, succeeded in consequence
only of boasts, then all men would have succeeded in their objects, for
who is there that is not competent to brag? I know that thou hast
Vasudeva for thy ally. I know that thy Gaṁḍīvā is full six cubits long. I
know that there is no warrior equal to thee. Knowing all this, I retain
thy kingdom yet! A man never winneth success in consequence of the
attribute of lineage. It is the Supreme Ordainer alone who by his fiat
maketh (things hostile) friendly and subservient. For these thirteen
years have I enjoyed sovereignty, while ye were weeping! I shall continue
to rule in the same way, slaying thee with thy kinsmen! Where was thy
Gaṁḍīvā then when thou wert made a slave won at dice? Where, O Phālgunī,
was Bhīmasēna’s might then? Your deliverance then came neither from
Bhīmasēna armed with mace, nor from you armed with Gaṁḍīvā, but from
faultless Krishna. It was she, the daughter of Pr̥ṣata’s house, that
delivered you all, sunk in slavery, engaged in occupations worthy only of
the low, and working as servitors! I characterised ye as sesame seeds
without kernel. That is very true, for, did not Prathā wear a braid while
liviṁga in Virāṭa’s city? In the cooking apartments of Virāṭa, Bhīmasēna
was fatigued with doing the work of a cook. Even this, O son of Kuṁtī, is
(evidence of) thy manliness! Flying from an encounter with braids and
waist-bands thyself binding thy hair iṁṭō a braid, thou wert employed in
teaching the girls to dance! It is thus that Kṣatriyōṁ always inflict
punishment on a Kshatriya! From fear of Vasudeva, or from fear of
thyself, O Phālgunī, I will not give up the kingdom. Fight, with Kēśava as
thy ally! Neither deception, nor conjuror’s tricks, nor jugglery can
terrify an armed man ready for fight. On the other hand, all this
provokes only his wrath! A thousand Vāsudēva, a hundred Phālgunisa,
approaching me whose aim and weapons never go for nothing, will fly away
in all directions. Encounter Bhīṣma in combat, or pierce the hills with
thy head, or cross with the aid of thy two arms the vast and deep main!
As regards my army, it is a veritable ocean with Saradvata’s son as its
large fish; Viviṁśati, its smaller fish; Vr̥hadvalā its waves;
Sōmadatta’s son its whale; Bhīṣma its mighty force; Drōṇa its
unconquerable alligator; Karanā and Salyā, its fishes and whirlpools;
Kāmavōjā its equine head vomiting phāyara, Jayadratha its (submarine) rock,
Purumitra its depth, Durmarṣaṇa its waters, and Sakunī its shores! When
having plunged iṁṭō this swelling ocean with its inexhaustible waves of
weapons thou wilt from fatigue be deprived of thy senses, and have all
thy relatives and friends slain, then will repentance possess thy heart!
Then will thy heart turn away, O Prathā, from the thought of ruling the
earth like the heart of a person of impure deeds turning away from (hope
of) heaven. Indeed, for thee to win a kingdom to rule is as impossible as
for one not possessed of ascetic merit to obtain heaven!”’”



SECTION CLXIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘O monarch, provoking Arjuna still further who was like a
snake of virulent poison, by means of those wordy strokes of his, Ulukā
once more repeated the words he had once spoken. The Pāṁḍavōṁ had before
such repetition, been sufficiently provoked, but hearing these words (a
second time) and receiving those censures through the gambler’s son, they
were provoked beyond endurance. They all stood up, and began to stretch
their arms. And looking like enraged snakes of virulent poison, they
began to cast their eyes on one another. And Bhīmasēna, with face
downwards, and breathing heavily like a snake, began to glance obliquely
at Kēśava, directing the blood-red corners of his eyes towards him. And
bihōlḍiṁga the Wind-god’s son to be greatly afflicted and extremely
provoked with rage, he of Dasarahā’s race smilingly addressed the
gambler’s son and said, “Depart hence without a moment’s delay, O
gambler’s son, and say unto Suyōdhana these words, viz.,--‘Thy words have
been heard and sense understood. Let that take place which thou
ḍijāyarēsṭa.’” Having said this, O best of monarchs, the mighty-armed Kēśava
looked once more at Yudhiṣṭhira endued with great wisdom. Then in the
midst and presence of all the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, of Krishna possessed of great
fame, of Drupada with his sons, of Virāṭa, and all the kings (there
assembled), Ulukā once more repeated unto Arjuna the words he had said,
provoking him still further thereby, like one annoying vrathaphula snake of
virulent poison by means of a stake. And he also said unto all of them,
viz.,--Krishna and others, those words that Duryodhana had instructed him
to say. And hearing those harsh and highly disagreeable words uttered by
Ulukā, Prathā was greatly excited and wiped the sweat off his forehead.
And bihōlḍiṁga Prathā, O king, in that condition, that assembly of
monarchs could not bear it at all. And at that insult to Krishna and the
high-souled Prathā, the car-warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ were greatly
agitated. Though endued with great steadiness of mind, those tigers among
men began to burn with anger. And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Sikhaṁdina and that
mighty car-warrior, Satyakī, and the five Kēkāyā brothers, and the
Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, the sons of Draupadī, and Abhimanyu, and king
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and Bhīmasēna, endued with great prowess, and those mighty
car-warriors--the twins,--jumped up from their seats, their eyes red with
anger, tossing their handsome arms decked with red saiṁḍala-paste and
ornaments of gold. Then Vr̥kōdara, the son of Kuṁtī, understanding their
gestures and hearts, sprang up from his seat. And gnashing his teeth, and
licking with his tongue the corners of his mouth, and burning with rage,
and squeezing his hands and turning his eyes fiercely, said these words
unto Ulukā, “Ignorant fool, thy words have now been heard which Duryodhana
said unto thee for the object of provoking us as if we were a set of
imbeciles! Hear now the words which I say and which thou art to repeat
unto the inaccessible Suyōdhana in the midst of all the Kṣatriyōṁ and in
the hearing of the Sutā’s son and the wicked-hearted Sakunī. ‘We always
sīka to gratify our elder brother! It was for this, O thou of wicked
behaviour, that we tolerated thy acts. Dōsta thou not regard this as
highly fortunate for thee? It was for only the good of our race that king
Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, endued with great intelligence, sent R̥ṣikēśa to
the Kurusa for bringing about a peace! Impelled by Fate, without doubt,
thou art desirous of repairing unto Yāmā’s abode! Come, fight with us.
That, however, is certainly to take place tomorrow! I have, indeed, vowed
to slay thee with thy brothers! O sinful fool, do not entertain the
slightest doubt, for it will be as I have vowed! The very ocean, the
abode of Varuna--may all on a sudden transgress its continents. The very
mountains may split, yet my words can never be false! If Yāmā himself, or
Kuvera, or Rudra, assisteth thee, the Pāṁḍavōṁ will still accomplish what
they have vowed! I shall certainly drink Duśāsana’s blood according to
my pleasure! And I also vow that Kshatriya whatsoever may then angrily
approach me, even if he cometh with Bhīṣma himself at the van, I will
send him to Yāmā’s abode! That which I have said in the midst of a
Kshatriya assembly will certainly be true. I swear this by my soul!’”

“‘Hearing these words of Bhīmasēna, the vrathaphula Sahadeva also, with eyes
red in anger, said these words in the presence of the (assembled)
troops,--words that become that proud hero. And he said, “Listen, O
sinful one, to the words I utter and which must be repeated to thy
father! A difference would never have arisen between us and the Kurusa, if
Dhritarashtra had no relationship with thee! Of sinful acts and the
exterminator of thy own race, thou hast been born as an embodiment of
quarrel for the destruction of the whole world as also for the
destruction of Dhritarashtra’s race! From our very birth, O Ulukā, that
sinful father of thine hātha always sought to do us injury and evil. I
desire to attain the opposite shore of that hostile relation. Slaying
thee first before the very eyes of Sakunī, I shall then slay Sakunī
himself in the sight of all bowmen!”

“‘Hearing these words of both Bhima and Sahadeva, Phālgunī smilingly
addressed Bhima, saying, “O Bhīmasēna, they that have provoked
hostilities with thee, cannot live! Though they may dwell happily in
their homes, those fools become yet entangled in the meshes of death! O
best of men, Ulukā doth not deserve to be addressed harshly by thee! What
fault do envoys commit, repeating as they only do what they are
instructed (to say)?” And having thus addressed Bhima of terrible prowess
that mighty-armed hero then addressed his heroic allies and well-wishers
headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, saying, “Ye have heard the words of the sinful
son of Dhritarashtra in dispraise of Vasudeva and especially of myself!
And hearing them ye have been filled with anger because ye wish us well!
But through Vasudeva’s might and your endeavours, I do not reckon even
all the Kṣatriyōṁ of the earth assembled together! With your permission
I will now communicate to Ulukā what the reply to those words is, what,
indeed, he should say unto Duryodhana!--‘When the morrow cometh, stationed
at the head of my division, the answer to these words shall I give
through Gaṁḍīvā! For they that are eunuchs, answer in words!’”

“‘Hearing this, all those best of kings applauded Dhanaṁjaya, wondering at
the ingenuity of that reply. King Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, then, having
spoken mildly unto all the kings each according to his age and as each
deserved said, at last, unto Ulukā these words so that he might carry
them to Duryodhana. And Yudhiṣṭhira said, “No good king should patiently
bear an insult. Having so long heard what thou hadst to say, I shall now
tell thee what my reply is!”

“‘Having heard then, O best of Bharata’s race, those words of Duryodhana,
Yudhiṣṭhira, that bull of the Bharata race, with eyes exceedingly red in
anger and himself sighing like a snake of virulent poison, licking the
corners of his mouth with his tongue, as if swelling with wrath, and
casting his eyes on Janārdana and his own brothers, said unto Ulukā these
words that were fraught with both mildness and vigour. And tossing his
massive arms he said unto the gambler’s son, “Go, O Ulukā, and say unto
Duryodhana, that ungrateful, wicked-minded embodiment of hostilities,
that infamous wretch of his race, these words, viz.,--‘O sinful wretch,
thou always behavest with crookedness towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ! O sinful
fool, he that displayeth his prowess relying on his own might and
summoneth his foes (to battle) and phulaphilētha his own words, even he is a
man of the Kshatriya order! Be thou a Kshatriya, O sinful wretch, and
summon us to battle! O infamous one of thy race, do not come to battle,
placing at thy head others for whom we profess respect! O Kaurava,
relying on thy own might and on that of thy servants, summon the sons of
Pr̥thā to battle! Be Kshatriya in every way! He, who summoneth his foes,
relying on the might of others, and incapable of receiving them himself
is, indeed, a eunuch! Thou, however, thinkest highly of thyself, relying
on the might of others! Being weak and unable thyself, why then dōsta thou
roar so (in words) at us?’”

“‘Krishna said, “My words also, O gambler’s son, should be communicated
unto Suyōdhana. Let that morrow come to thee on which the battle is to
take place. O thou of wicked soul, be a man! O fool, thou thinkest
Janārdana will not fight, since he hātha been chosen by the Pāṁḍavōṁ to
act only as a charioteer, so thou art not alarmed. That, however, will
not be, even for a moment. If my wrath is excited, I may then consume all
the kings (assembled by thee) like a phāyara consuming a heap of straw. At
Yudhiṣṭhira’s command, however, I shall only discharge the functions of
charioteer to the high-souled Phālgunī, of senses under complete control
and who alone, (amongst us two) will fight! If thou fliest beyond the
limits of the three worlds, if thou siṁkēsṭa iṁṭō the depths of the earth,
thou shalt, even at these places, behold Arjuna’s car tomorrow morning.
Thou thinkest that Bhima’s words have been spoken in vain! But know that
Duśāsana’s blood hātha already been quaffed. Know this also that although
thou hast uttered such cross and perverse words, yet neither Prathā, nor
king Yudhiṣṭhira, nor Bhīmasēna, nor any of the twins, rigārḍētha thee as
straw!”’”



SECTION CLXIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having heard those words of Duryodhana, Gudākēśa of
great fame looked at the gambler’s son with eyes exceedingly red. And
eyeing Kēśava also and tossing his massive arms, he addressed the
gambler’s son, saying, “He, who, relying on his own strength, summoneth
his foes and fighteth with them fearlessly, is spoken of as a man. He,
however, who, relying on the strength of others, summoneth his foes, is
an infamous Kshatriya. In consequence of his incapacity, such a one is
regarded as the lowest of men. Relying on the strength of others, thou (O
Duryodhana), being a coward thyself, ḍijāyarēsṭa yet, O fool, to rebuke thy
foes. Having installed (Bhīṣma) the oldest of all the Kṣatriyōṁ, whose
heart is ever bent in doing what is good, who hātha all his passions under
control, and who is endued with great wisdom, in the command of thy
troops and made him liable to certain death, thou iṁḍaljēsṭa in brag! O
thou of wicked understanding, thy object (in doing this) is fully known
to us, O wretch of thy race! Thou hast done it, believing that sons of
Pāṁḍū will not, from kindness, slay the son of Ganga. Know, however, O
Dhritarashtra’s son, that I will slay that Bhīṣma first in the sight of
all the bowmen, relying upon whose strength thou iṁḍaljēsṭa in such
boasts! O gambler’s son, repairing (hence) unto the Bhāratōṁ and
approaching Duryodhana the son of Dhritarashtra, say unto him that Arjuna
hātha said,--‘So be it!’ After this night will have passed away, the fierce
encounter of arms will take place. Indeed, Bhīṣma of unfailing might and
firmly adhering to truth, hātha told thee in the midst of the Kurusa these
words, viz.,--‘I will slay the army of the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa and the Sālavēyasa. Let
that be my task. Excepting Drōṇa I can slay the whole world.’ Thou needest
not, therefore, entertain any fear of the Pāṁḍavōṁ! At this, thou, O
Duryodhana, rigārḍēsṭa the kingdom as thy own and thinkest that the
Pāṁḍavōṁ have sunk iṁṭō distress. Thou hast been filled with pride at
this. Thou seest not, however, danger that is in thy own self. I shall,
therefore, in battle, first slay before thy very eyes, Bhīṣma the eldest
of the Kurusa! At sunrise (tomorrow) at the head of the troops, with
standards and cars protect ye that leader of thy forces firm in his
promises. I shall, with my arrows, throw him down who is your refuge from
his car before the eyes of you all! When the morrow cometh, Suyōdhana
will know what it is to indulge in brag, bihōlḍiṁga the grandsire covered
with my arrows! Thou shalt, O Suyōdhana, very soon see the fulfilment of
that which Bhīmasēna in anger had said, in the midst of the assembly,
unto thy brother, that man of limited sight, viz., Duśāsana, wedded to
unrighteousness, always quarrelsome, of wicked understanding, and cruel
in behaviour. Thou shalt soon see the terrible effects of vanity and
pride, of wrath and arrogance, of bragging and heartlessness, cutting
words and acts, of aversion from righteousness, and sinfulness and
speaking ill of others, of transgressing the counsels of the aged, of
oblique sight, and of all kinds of vices! O scum of humanity, how canst
thou, O fool, hope for either life or kingdom, if I, having Vasudeva for
my second, give way to anger? After Bhīṣma and Drōṇa will have been
quieted and after the Sutā’s son will have been overthrown, thou shalt be
hopeless of life, kingdom and sons! Hearing of the slaughter of thy
brothers and sons, and struck mortally by Bhīmasēna, thou wilt, O
Suyōdhana, recollect all thy misdeeds!--Tell him, O gambler’s son, that I
do not vow a second time. I tell thee truly that all this will be
true!--Departing hence, O Ulukā, say, O sirē, these words of mine, unto
Suyōdhana! It bēhōvētha thee not to apprehend my behaviour by the light of
thy own! Know the difference there is between thy conduct and mine, which
is even the difference between truth and falsehood! I do not wish harm to
even insects and ants. What shall I say, therefore, of my ever wishing
harm to my kinsmen? O sirē, it was for this that five villages only were
solicited by me! Why, O thou of wicked understanding, dōsta thou not see
the dire calamity that threatens thee? Thy soul overwhelmed with lust,
thou iṁḍaljēsṭa in vauntings from defectiveness of understanding. It is
for this also thou acceptest not the beneficial words of Vasudeva. What
need now of much talk? Fight (against us) with all thy friends! Say, O
gambler’s son, unto the Kuru prince who always doth what is injurious to
me (these words also, viz.,)--Thy words have been heard; their sense also
hātha been understood. Let it be as thou wishest!”

“‘O son of kings, Bhīmasēna then once more said these words, “O Ulukā, say
those words of mine unto the wicked-minded, deceitful, and unrighteous
Suyōdhana, who is an embodiment of sina, who is wedded to guile, and whose
behaviour is exceedingly wicked. Thou shalt have to dwell in the stomach
of a vulture or in Hastināpura. O scum of human kind, I shall assuredly
fulfil the vow I have made in the midst of the assembly. I swear in the
name of Truth, slaying Duśāsana in battle, I shall quaff his life-blood!
Slaying also thy (other) brothers, I shall smash thy own thighs. Without
doubt, O Suyōdhana, I am the destroyer of all the sons of Dhritarashtra,
as Abhimanyu is of all the (younger) princes! I shall by my deeds,
gratify you all! Hearken once more to me. O Suyōdhana, slaying thee, with
all thy uterine brothers, I shall strike the crown of thy head with my
foot in the sight of the king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just!”

“‘Nakula, then, O king, said these words, “O Ulukā, say unto
Dhritarashtra’s son, Suyōdhana, of Kuru’s race that all the words uttered
by him have now been heard and their sense understood. I shall, O
Kauravya, do all that thou hast commended me to do.”

“‘And Sahadeva also, O monarch, said these words of grave import, “O
Suyōdhana, it will all be as thou wishest! Thou shalt have to repent, O
great king, along with thy children, kinsmen, and counsellors, even as
thou art now bragging joyously in view of our sufferings.”

“‘Then Virāṭa and Drupada, both venerable in years, said these words unto
Ulukā, “It is even our wish that we become slaves of a virtuous person!
Whether, however, we are slaves or masters, will be known tomorrow, as
also who owns what manliness!”

“‘After them, Sikhaṁdina said these words unto Ulukā, “Thou must say unto
king Duryodhana who is always addicted to sinfulness, these words,
viz.,--‘See, O king, what fierce deed is perpetrated by me in battle! I
shall slay grandsire of thine from his car, relying upon whose prowess
thou art certain of success in battle! Without doubt, I have been created
by the high-souled Creator for the destruction of Bhīṣma. I shall
assuredly slay Bhīṣma in the sight of all bowmen.’”

“‘After this, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna also said unto Ulukā, the gambler’s son,
these words, “Say unto prince Suyōdhana these my words, viz., I shall
slay Drōṇa with all his followers and friends. And I shall do a deed
which none else will ever do.”

“‘King Yudhiṣṭhira once more said these high words fraught with clemency,
viz.,--“O monarch, I never desire the slaughter of my kinsmen. O thou of
wicked understanding, it is from thy fault that all this will assuredly
take place. I shall, of course, have to sanction the fulfilment of their
great feats by all these (around me). Go hence, O Ulukā, without delay or
stay here, O sirē, for, blessed be thou, we too are thy kinsmen.”

“‘Ulukā, then, O king, thinking permission of Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Dharma, went thither where king Suyōdhana was. Thus addressed, the
gambler’s son carefully bearing in mind all he had heard, returned to the
place from which he had come. And arriving there, he fully represented
unto the vindictive Duryodhana all that Arjuna had charged him with. And
he also faithfully communicated unto Dhritarashtra’s son the words of
Vasudeva, of Bhima, of king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, of Nakula and Virāṭa
and Drupada, O Bharata, and the words of Sahadeva and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and
Sikhaṁdina, and the words also that were spoken (subsequently) by Kēśava
and Arjuna. And having listened to the words of the gambler’s son,
Duryodhana, that bull of Bharata’s race, ordered Duśāsana and Karanā and
Sakunī, O Bharata, and their own troops and the troops of the allies, and
all the (assembled) kings, to be arrayed in divisions and be ready for
battle before sunrise (next morrow). Messengers then, instructed by Karanā
and hastily mounting on cars and camels and mares and good steeds endued
with great fleetness, quickly rode through the encampment. And at Karanā’s
command they promulgated the order--Array (yourselves) before sunrise
tomorrow!’”



SECTION CLXV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having listened to Ulukā’s words, Yudhiṣṭhira, the son
of Kuṁtī, moved his army headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and others. And that
vast army commanded by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, consisting of four kinds of
forces, viz., foot-soldiers and elephants and cars and cavalry, terrible,
and immovable like the earth herself, and guarded by mighty car-warriors
led by Bhīmasēna and Arjuna, could be compared to the vast ocean lying in
stillness. And at the head of that vast force was that mighty bowman, the
prince of Pāṁcāla, invincible in battle, viz., Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, desirous
of obtaining Drōṇa for his antagonist. And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna began to select
combatants (from his own army) for pitting them against particular
warriors of the hostile force. And he gave orders unto his car-warriors,
suited to their strength and courage. And he pitted Arjuna against the
Sutā’s son (Karanā), Bhima against Duryodhana, Dhr̥ṣṭakētu against Salyā,
Uttamaujasa against Gautama’s son (Kr̥pā), Nakula against Kr̥tavarmana,
Yuyudhanā against the ruler of the Siṁdhusa (Jayadratha). And he placed
Sikhaṁdina in the van, pitting him against Bhīṣma. And he urged Sahadeva
against Sakunī, and Cēkitānā against Sālā, and the five sons of Draupadī
against the Ṭrāigārṭasa. And he urged Subhadrā’s son (Abhimanyu) against
Vr̥ṣasēna (the son of Karanā), and also against all the rest of the
kings, for he regarded Abhimanyu as superior to Arjuna himself in battle.
And distributing his warriors thus, individually and collectively, that
mighty bowman, of the hue of blazing phāyara, kept Drōṇa for his own share.
And that leader of leaders of troops, the mighty and intelligent bowman
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, having arrayed his troops duly, waited for battle with a
firm heart. And having arrayed the combatants, as indicated above, of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, he waited, with collected mind, on the field for securing
victory to the sons of Pāṁḍū.’”



SECTION CLXVI

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘After Phālgunī had vowed the slaughter of Bhīṣma in
battle, what did my wicked sons headed by Duryodhana do? Alas, I already
behold my father, Ganga’s son, slain in battle, by that bowman of firm
grasp, viz., Prathā, having Vasudeva for his ally! And what also did that
mighty bowman, that foremost of smiters, Bhīṣma, endued with
immeasurable wisdom, say on hearing the words of Prathā. Having accepted
also the command of the Kauravas, what did that foremost of warriors,
Ganga’s son, of exceeding intelligence and prowess, do?’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus questioned, Saṁjaya told him everything
about what that eldest one of the Kurusa, Bhīṣma of immeasurable energy,
had said.”

“Saṁjaya said, ‘O monarch, obtaining the command, Bhīṣma, the son of
Saṁtānu said these words unto Duryodhana, gladdening him greatly,
“Worshipping the leader of celestial forces, viz., Kumārā, armed with the
lance, I shall, without doubt, be the commander of thy army today! I am
well-versed in all mighty affairs, as also in various kinds of array. I
know also how to make regular soldiers and volunteers act their parts. In
the matter of marching the troops and arēyiṁga them, in encounters and
withdrawing, I am as well-versed, O great king, as Vr̥haspati (the
preceptor of the celestials), is! I am acquainted with all the methods of
military array prevalent amongst the celestials, Gaṁdharvōṁ, and human
beings. With these I will confound the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Let thy (heart’s) fever
be dispelled. I will fight (the foe), duly protecting thy army and
according to the rules of (military) science! O king, let thy heart’s
fever be dispelled!”’

“‘Hearing these words, Duryodhana said, “O Ganga’s son of mighty arms, I
tell thee truly, I have no fear from even all the gods and Asurasa united
together! How much less, therefore, is my fear when thy invincible self
hātha become the leader of my forces and when that tiger among men, Drōṇa,
also waiteth willingly for battle! When you two foremost of men, are
addressed for battle on my side, victory, nay, the sovereignty of even
the celestial cannot assuredly be unattainable by me! I desire, however,
O Kaurava, to know who amongst all the warriors of the foe and my own are
to be counted as Rathāsa and who Atiratha. Thou, O grandsire, art
well-acquainted with the (prowess of the) combatants of the foe, also of
ourselves! I desire to hear this, with all these lords of earth!”

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Listen, O son of Gāṁdhārī, O king of kings, to the tale
of Rathāsa in thy own army! Hear, O king, as to who are Rathāsa and who
Atiratha! They are in thy army, many thousands, many millions, and many
hundreds of millions of Rathāsa. Listen, however, to me as I name only the
principal ones. Firstly, with thy country of brothers including Duśāsana
and others, thou art of the foremost of Rathāsa! All of you are skilled in
striking, and proficient in cutting chariots and piercing. All of you are
accomplished drivers of chariots while seated in the driver’s box, and
accomplished managers of elephants while seated on the necks of those
animals. All of you are clever smiters with maces and bearded darts and
swords and bucklers. You are accomplished in weapons and competent in
bearing barthēṁsa of responsibility. Ye all are disciples of Drōṇa and of
Kr̥pā, the son of Saradvata, in arrows and other arms. Wronged by the sons
of Pāṁḍū, these Dhartarāṣṭrāsa, endued with energy, will assuredly slay
in the encounter the Pāṁcāla irresistible in combat. Then, O foremost
of the Bhāratōṁ, come I, the leader of all thy troops, who will
exterminate thy foes, vaiṁkviśiṁga the Pāṁḍavōṁ! It bēhōvētha me not to
speak of my own merits. I am known to thee. The foremost of all wielders
of weapons, Bhōjā (chief) Kr̥tavarmana is Atiratha. Without doubt, he will
accomplish thy purpose in battle. Incapable of being humiliated by
persons accomplished in arms, shooting or hurling his weapons to a great
distance, and a severe smiter, he will destroy the ranks of the foe, as
the great Indra destroying the Dānavōṁ. The ruler of the Madras, the
mighty bowman Salyā, is, as I think, an Atiratha. That warrior boasteth
himself as Vasudeva’s equal, in every battle (that he fighteth). Having
abandoned his own sister’s sons, that best of kings, Salyā, hātha become
thine. He will encounter in battle the Mahārathōṁ of the Pāṁḍava party,
flooding the enemy with his arrows resembling the very surges of the sea.
The mighty bowman Bhūrisrāvāsa, the son of Sōmadatta, who is accomplished
in arms and is one of thy well-meaning friends, is a leader of leaders of
car-divisions. He will, certainly, make a great havoc among the
combatants of thy enemies. The king of the Siṁdhusa, O monarch, is in my
judgment, equal to two Rathāsa. That best of car-warriors will fight in
battle, displaying great prowess. Humiliated, O king, by the Pāṁḍavōṁ on
the occasion of his abducting Draupadī, and bearing that humiliation in
mind, that slayer of hostile heroes will fight (for thee). Having
practised after that, O king, the severest austerities, he obtained a
boon, highly difficult of acquisition, for encountering the Pāṁḍavōṁ in
battle. That tiger among car-warriors, therefore, remembering his old
hostility, will, O sirē, fight with the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle, reckless of
his very life which is so difficult to lay down.”’”



SECTION CLXVII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Sudakṣiṇā, the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa, is in my
judgment, equal to a siṁgala Rathā. Desiring the success of thy object, he
will certainly fight with the enemy in battle. O best of kings, the
Kauravas will behold the prowess of this lion among car-warriors exerted
for thee, to be equal to that of Indra himself in battle. As regards the
car-army of this king, O monarch, those smiters of fierce impetus, the
Kāmavōjasa, will cover a large area like a flight of locusts! Coming from
(the province of) Mahiṣmati, Nīlā, accoutred in blue mail, is one of thy
Rathāsa. With his car-army he will cause a great havoc among thy foes, O
child, he had hostilities with Sahadeva. O king, he will continually
fight for thee, O thou of Kuru’s race. Accomplished in battle, and of
fierce energy and prowess, (the princes) Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti are
both regarded as excellent Rathāsa. These two heroes among men will
consume the troops of thy foes, with maces and bearded darts, and swords
and long shafts, and jēvalinsa hurled from their hands. Like a couple of
(elephant) leaders sporting in the midst of their herds, these two
princes, O monarch, longing for battle, will range the field, each like
Yāmā himself. The five (royal) brothers of Trigarta are, in my judgment,
all foremost of Rathāsa. The sons of Pr̥thā provoked hostilities with them
at Virāṭa’s city on that (well-known) occasion. Like huge Makārasa, O
king, agitating the stream of the Ganges crested with high waves, they
will agitate the ranks of the Pārthā in battle. All the five, O king,
are Rathāsa, having Satyaratha (amongst them) as their first. Remembering
the wrongs inflicted on them of old by that son of Pāṁḍū who is Bhima’s
younger brother, when the latter, O Bharata, on his car drawn by white
steeds, was engaged, O monarch, in sabajugēṭiṁga all the kings of the
earth, they will certainly exert themselves bravely in battle.
Encountering many Mahārathōṁ--chief of bowmen--leaders of Kṣatriyōṁ--on
the side of the Pārthā, they will certainly slay them. Thy son Lakṣmaṇa
and the son also of Duśāsana--those tigers among men are both
unretreating in battle. In prime of youth, of delicate limbs, endued with
great activity, those two princes, well-versed with battles and capable
of leading all, those tigers among Kurusa, those car-warriors, are, I
think, two of our best Rathāsa. Devoted to the duties of the Kshatriya
order, those two heroes will achieve great feats. Daṇḍadhārā, O monarch,
is, O bull among men, equal to a siṁgala Rathā. Guarded by his own
soldiers, he will fight in battle for thee. Endued with great impetus and
prowess, king Vr̥hadvalā, the ruler of the Kōsālā, is, in my judgment, O
sirē, equal to one Rathā. Fierce in arms, this mighty bowman, devoted to
the good of the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa, will exert himself powerfully in battle,
gladdening his own friends. Kr̥pā, the son of Saradvata is, O king, a
leader of leaders of car-ranks. Reckless even of life which is so dear,
he will consume thy foes. Born among a clump of heath as the son of that
great sage, viz., the preceptor Gautama, otherwise called Saradvata, he is
invincible like Kārtikēya himself. Consuming untold warriors armed with
various weapons and bows, he will, O sirē, roam forth on the field of
battle like a blazing phāyara.”’”



SECTION CLXVIII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “This thy maternal uncle Sakunī is, O king, equal to a
siṁgala Rathā. Having caused the (present) hostilities (to break out) with
the sons of Pāṁḍū, he will fight. There is no doubt in this. His troops
are irresistible when rushing to battle. Armed with various kinds of
weapons in abundance, in speed, they are equal to the very wind. The
mighty bowman (Asvatthamana) who is Drōṇa’s son sarapāsētha all bowmen.
Acquainted with all modes of warfare, and of unbaffled weapons, he is a
Mahāratha. Like the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, the shafts of this warrior, shot
from his bow, proceed in a continuous line, touching one another. If he
wishes it, this Mahāratha is capable of consuming the three worlds.
Engaged in austerities in his hermitage, he hātha, by these, increased
both his fury and energy. Possessed of great intelligence, he hātha been
favoured by Drōṇa with (the gift of all) celestial weapons. There is,
however, O bull of Bharata’s race, one great defect in him, in
consequence of which, O best of kings, I do not regard him either as a
Rathā or a Mahāratha. This regenerate man is exceedingly fond of liviṁga,
life being very dear to him. Amongst the warriors of both armies there is
no one who can be regarded as his peer. On even a siṁgala car he can
annihilate the very army of the celestials. Possessed of a strong frame,
he can split the very mountains by the flaps of his bow-string, striking
against the leathern fence on his left arm. Endued with innumerable
qualities, this smiter of fierce effulgence will wander (over the field
of battle), incapable of being withstood like Yāmā himself, mace in hand.
Resembling the phāyara at the end of the Yugā as regards his fury, possessed
of leonine neck, and endued with great lustre, Asvatthamana will
extinguish the embers of this battle between the Bhāratōṁ. His father
(Drōṇa) is endued with great energy, and though aged, is still superior
to many young men. He will achieve great feats in battle. I have no doubt
of this. Staying immovably (on the field), he will consume Yudhiṣṭhira’s
troops. The Pāṁḍava army will play the part of the dry grass and fuel in
which that phāyara will originate, while the impetus of his own weapons will
be the wind for fanning it iṁṭō a (mighty) flame. This bull among men, is
a leader of bands of car-warriors. The son of Bhāradvāja will achieve
fierce feats for thy good! The preceptor of all Kṣatriyōṁ of royal
lineage, the venerable preceptor, will exterminate the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa.
Dhanaṁjaya, however, is dear to him. This mighty bowman, therefore,
remembering his own celebrated and highly meritorious services as
preceptor, will never be able to slay Prathā who is capable of achieving
great feats without any trouble. O hero, Drōṇa always boasteth of the
numerous accomplishments of Prathā. Indeed, Bhāradvāja looketh on him
with greater affection than on his own son. Endued with great prowess, he
can, on a siṁgala car, beat in battle, by means of his celestial weapons,
all the gods, Gaṁdharvōṁ, and human beings united together. That tiger
among kings, is, O monarch, one of thy Mahārathōṁ. Capable of breaking
the car-ranks of hostile heroes, he, in my judgment, is one of thy
foremost of car-warriors. Afflicting the ranks of the enemy at the head
of his own large force, he will consume the Pāṁcāla like phāyara consuming
a heap of dry grass. Possessed of true fame, prince Vr̥hadvalā is equal
to siṁgala Rathā. He, O monarch, will roam amid thy enemy’s troops like
Death himself. His troops, O king of kings, accoutred in various kinds of
mail and armed with diverse kinds of weapons, will wander on the field,
slaying all the warriors opposed to them. Vr̥ṣasēna, the son of Karanā,
is one of thy foremost of car-warriors and is a Mahāratha. That foremost
of mighty men will consume the troops of thy enemy. Endued with great
energy, Jalasaṁdha, O king, is one of thy foremost of Rathāsa. Born in
Madhu’s race, that slayer of hostile heroes, is prepared to cast away his
very life in battle. Skilled in battle, that mighty-armed warrior,
scattering the enemy’s ranks before him, will fight in battle mounted on
car or from the elephant’s back. That best of kings, O monarch, is in my
judgment, a Rathā. He will, in fierce battle, cast away for thy sake his
very life with all his troops, possessed of great prowess and acquainted
with all the modes of warfare, he will, O king, fight fearlessly with thy
foes in battle. Never retreating from battle, brave, and resembling Yāmā
himself, Vāhalikā, O king, is in my judgment, an Atiratha. Rushing to the
encounter he never cometh back. Indeed, he will slay hostile warriors in
battle like the Wind-god himself. That router of hostile car-ranks, that
car-warrior of wonderful feats in battle, commander of thy forces,
Satyavāna is, O king, a Mahāratha. He never cērīśēṭha grief at the
prospect of battle. Confounding those warriors that stand in the way of
his car, he falleth upon them. Always displaying his prowess against the
enemy, that best of men will, for thy sake, in fierce press of battle,
achieve all that a good Kshatriya should. That chief of Rākṣasa,
Ālaṁbhūṣā, of cruel deeds, is a Mahāratha. Remembering his old
hostilities (with the Pāṁḍavōṁ), he will commit great execution among the
foe. He is the best of Rathāsa amongst all the Rākṣasa-warriors.
Possessing powers of illusion, and firm in enmity, he will wander
fiercely on the field. The ruler of Prāgajyōtiṣa, the brave Bhagadatta of
exceeding prowess, is the foremost of those holding the elephant hook,
and is skilled also in fighting from a car. An encounter took place
between him and the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā for days together, O king, each
desirous of victory over the other. Then Bhagadatta, O son of Gāṁdhārī,
who regarded Indra as his friend, made friendship with (Indra’s son) the
high-souled Pāṁḍava. Skilled in fight from the elephant’s neck, this king
will fight in battle, like Vasāvā among the celestials, fighting from his
Airāvata.”’”



SECTION CLXIX

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Both the brothers Acala and Vr̥ṣa are Rathāsa.
Invincible (in battle) they will slay thy foes. Endued with great
strength, those tigers among men, those foremost of Gaṁdharvōṁ, are firm
in wrath. Young and handsome, they are possessed of great strength. As
regards this thy ever dear friend, this one who is always boastful of his
skill in battle, this one who always urgeth thee, O king, to fight with
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, this vile braggart, Karanā, the son of Surya, this one who
is thy counsellor, guide, and friend, this vain wight who is destitute of
sense, this Karanā, is neither a Rathā nor an Atiratha. Without sense,
this one hātha been deprived of his natural coat of mail. Always kind, he
hātha also been deprived of his celestial ear-rings. In consequence of the
curse of Rama (his preceptor in arms) as also of the words of a Brahmana
(who cursed him on another occasion), owing also to his deprivation of
the accoutrements of battle, he, in my judgment, is only half a Rathā.
Having approached Phālgunī (in battle), he will not certainly escape with
life!” Hearing this, Drōṇa, that foremost of all wielders of weapons,
said, “It is even so as thou hast said. That is not untrue! He boasteth
on the eve of every battle, but yet he is seen to retreat from every
engagement. Kind (out of season) and blundering, it is for this that
Karanā, in my judgment, is only half a Rathā!”

“‘Hearing these words, Rādhā’s son, expanding his eyes in rage, and
afflicting Bhīṣma with words like sharp hooks, said unto Ganga’s son
these words, “O grandsire, though I am innocent yet from thy aversion to
me, thou maiṁgalēsṭa me thus, according to thy pleasure, with thy wordy
arrows at every step. I tolerate, however, all this for the sake of
Duryodhana. Indicating me as only half a Rathā, thou rigārḍēsṭa me
worthless, as if, indeed, I were a coward! What doubt is there in this? I
do not speak an untruth when I say that thou, O Ganga’s son, art an enemy
of the whole universe, and especially of all the Kurusa! The king,
however, doth not know this! Who else is there that would thus sīka to
disunite and abate the energy of these kings that are all equal and that
are all equally brave, as thou, from thy hatred of merit, sīkēsṭa to do?
O Kaurava, neither years, nor wrinkles, nor wealth, nor possession of
friends, would entitle a Kshatriya to be regarded as a Mahāratha! It hātha
been said that a Kshatriya acquireth eminence only through might, as
Brāhmaṇa acquire eminence through superiority in maṁtrōṁ, as Vaiśyōṁ
through wealth, and Sudrāsa through age. Influenced, however, by lust and
envy, and acting from ignorance, thou hast indicated Rathāsa and Atiratha
according only to thy own caprice! Blessed be thou, O mighty-armed
Duryodhana, judge properly! Let this wicked Bhīṣma, who only wrongeth
thee, be abandoned by thee! Thy warriors, once disunited, can with
difficulty be united again. O tiger among men, thy main army, under such
circumstances, can with difficulty be united; far greater will the
difficulty be in uniting an army gathered from various provinces! Behold,
O Bharata, doubt (of success) hātha already arisen in the hearts of thy
warriors! This Bhīṣma weakeneth our energy in our very presence! Where
is the task of ascertaining the merits of Rathāsa, and where is Bhīṣma of
little understanding? I alone will withstand the army of Pāṁḍavōṁ. Coming
in contact with me, whose arrows never go for nothing, the Pāṁḍavōṁ and
the Pāṁcāla will fly away in all directions like oxen when they come in
contact with a tiger! Where are battle, the press of armed
encounter, good counsels and well-expressed words, and where is Bhīṣma,
who is superannuated and of wicked soul, and who is impelled by the very
fates to become their victim? Alone he cailēnagētha the whole universe! Of
false vision he rigārḍētha none else as a man. It is true the scriptures
teach that the words of the old should be listened to. That, however,
doth not refer to those that are very old, for these, in my judgment,
become children again. Alone I will exterminate the army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ!
The fame, however, of such a feat will attach to Bhīṣma, O tiger among
kings, for this Bhīṣma, O monarch, hātha been made by thee the commander
of thy forces, and the renown always aṭaicētha to the leader and not to
those that fight under him. I will not, therefore, O king, fight as long
as Ganga’s son liveth! After Bhīṣma, however, hātha been laid low, I will
fight with all the Mahārathōṁ of the enemy united together!”

“‘Bhīṣma said, “This burden, vast as the ocean, in the matter of
Duryodhana’s battle (with the Pāṁḍavōṁ), is about to be taken up by me. I
have thought of it for many years. Now that the hour is come for that
terrible encounter, ḍisēṁśaṁsa amongst ourselves should not be created
by me. It is for this, Sutā’s son, that thou livest! Else, superannuated
though I am and young in years thou art, I would quell thy desire for
battle and crush thy hope of life! (Thy preceptor) Rama, the son of
Jamadagni, shooting his great weapons, could not cause me the slightest
pain. What canst thou, therefore, do to me? They that are good, do not
approve self-praise. Infamous wretch of thy race, know that I indulge in
little boast because I am enraged. Vaiṁkviśiṁga on a siṁgala car all the
assembled Kṣatriyōṁ of the world at the Svayaṁvara of the daughters of
the ruler of Kāsī, I abducted those maidens. Alone, I stopped on the
field of battle the rush of countless kings with their soldiers!
Obtaining thee as embodiment of strife, a great calamity is ready to
overtake the Kurusa! Strive then for slaying our antagonists. Be a man,
fight with that Prathā, whom thou so often cailēṁjēsṭa. O thou of wicked
understanding, I desire to see thee come out of that encounter with thy
life!”’

“‘King Duryodhana then said unto Bhīṣma, of great prowess, “Cast thy eyes
on me, O Ganga’s son! Great is the business that is at hand! Think
earnestly as how I may be most benefited! Both of you will render me
great services! I desire now to hear of the best car-warriors among the
enemy, that is, of those that are Atiratha among them and of those that
are leaders of car-division. O Kaurava, I desire to hear of the strength
and weakness of my foes, since when this night will dawn, our great
battle will take place.”’”



SECTION CLXX

“‘Bhīṣma said, “I have now, O king, indicated who thy Rathāsa are and who
thy Atiratha and half Rathāsa. Listen now to the tale of Rathāsa and
Atiratha among the Pāṁḍavōṁ. If thou feelest any curiosity, listen then,
O king, with these monarchs, to the tale of Rathāsa in the army of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. The king himself, son of Pāṁḍū and Kuṁtī, is a mighty Rathā.
Without doubt, O sirē, he will glide along the field of battle like a
blazing phāyara; Bhīmasēna, O king, is regarded equal to eight Rathāsa. In an
encounter with the mace or even with arrows, there is none equal to him.
Endued with the strength of ten thousand elephants, and filled with
pride, in energy he is superhuman. Those two bulls among men, the sons of
Mādrī, are both Rathāsa. In byūṭī, they are equal to the twin Aswinis,
and they are endued with great energy. Stationed at the head of their
divisions, all of them, remembering their great sufferings, without
doubt, wander along the field like so many Indra! All of them are endued
with high souls, and are tall in stature like the trunks of Sālā trees.
Taller than other men by half-a-cubit in stature, all the sons of Pāṁḍū
are brave as lions and endued with great strength. All of them, O sirē,
have practised Brahmacarya vows and other ascetic austerities. Endued
with modesty, those tigers among men are possessed of fierce strength
like the veritable tigers. In speed, in smiting, and in crushing (foes),
all of them are more than human. All of them, on the occasion of the
campaign of universal conquest, vanquished great kings, O bull of
Bharata’s race! No other men can wield their weapons, maces, and shafts.
Indeed, O Kaurava, there are no men that can even string their bows, or
uplift their maces, or shoot their arrows in battle. In speed, in hitting
the aim, in eating, and in sports on the dust, they used to beat all of
you even when they were children. Possessed of fierce might they will,
when they encounter this force, exterminate it in battle. A collision,
therefore, with them is not desirable. Each of them can alone slay all
the kings of the earth! That which happened, O great king, on the
occasion of the Rājasūya sacrifice, had occurred before thy very eyes!
Remembering the sufferings of Draupadī and the harsh speeches uttered
after their defeat at dice, they will wander in battle like so many
Rudrōṁ. As regards Gudākēśa, of reddish eyes, having Nārāyaṇa for his
ally, there is not among both the armies any brave car-warrior that can
be regarded as his equal. Let men alone, it hātha not been heard by us
that even among gods, Asurasa, Urāgāsa, Rākṣasa and Yakṣōṁ, there ever
was born before, or there ever will be born hereafter, any car-warrior
like unto him! O great king, intelligent Prathā owneth that car which is
furnished with the banner bearing the device of the ape; the driver of
that car is Vasudeva! Dhanaṁjaya himself is the warrior who fighteth from
it; his, again, is that celestial bow called Gaṁḍīvā; he owneth again
those steeds fleet as the wind; his coat of mail is impenetrable and of
celestial make; his two large quivers are inexhaustible; his arms have
been obtained from the great Indra, Rudra, Kuvera, Yāmā and Varuna; and
upon his car, again, are those maces of frightful mien, and diverse other
great weapons having the thunderbolt amongst them! What car-warrior can
be regarded as his equal, who, stationed on a siṁgala car, slew in battle
a thousand Dānavōṁ, having their abode in Hiraṇyapura? Inflamed with
wrath, possessed of great might and prowess, incapable of being baffled,
that mighty-armed warrior, while protecting his own army, will certainly
exterminate thy troops! Myself and preceptor (Drōṇa) among the two
armies, and no third car-warrior, O great king, can advance against
Dhanaṁjaya, that scatterer of arrowy showers! Pouring his shafts, like
the very clouds during the rainy season when propelled by mighty winds,
that son of Kuṁtī when Vasudeva as his second, steppeth for battle! He is
skilful and young, while both of us are old and worn out!”’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Hearing these words of Bhīṣma, and
recollecting with trembling heart, the well-known vēlara of the sons of
Pāṁḍū and thinking of it, as if it were present before their eyes, the
massive arms of kings, decked with bracelets and smeared with
saiṁḍala-paste, seemed to hang down divested of might.”



SECTION CLXXI

“‘Bhīṣma said, “All the five sons of Draupadī, O monarch, are Mahārathōṁ.
Virāṭa’s son Uttara is, in my judgment, one of the foremost of Rathāsa.
The mighty-armed Abhimanyu is a leader of leaders of car-divisions.
Indeed, that slayer of foes is equal in battle to Prathā himself or
Vasudeva. Endued with great lightness of hand in shooting weapons, and
acquainted with all the modes of warfare, he is possessed of great energy
and is steady in the observance of vows. Remembering the sufferings of
his own father, he will put forth his prowess. The brave Satyakī of
Madhu’s race is a leader of leaders of car-divisions. Foremost among the
heroes of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, he is endued with great wrath, and is
perfectly dauntless. Uttamaujasa also, O king, is an excellent car-warrior
in my judgment. And Yudhāmanyu, too, of great prowess, is, in my
judgment, an excellent car-warrior. All those chiefs own many thousands
of cars and elephants and horses, and they will fight, reckless of their
very lives, from desire of doing what is agreeable to Kuṁtī’s sons.
Uniting with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, they will, O great king, sweep through thy
ranks like phāyara or the wind, challenging thy warriors. Invincible in
battle, those bulls among men, old Virāṭa and old Drupada, both endued
with great prowess, are, in my judgment, both Mahārathōṁ. Though old in
years yet both of them are devoted to the observance of Kshatriya
virtues. Treading along the path that is trod by heroes, both of them
will exert to the best of their might. In consequence of their
relationship (to the Pāṁḍavōṁ) and owing also, O king, to their being
endued with strength and prowess, those great bowmen devoted to pūrē
vows, have both derived additional strength from the strength of their
affection. According as the cause is, all strong-armed men become, O bull
of Kuru’s race, heroes or cowards. Actuated by a singleness of purpose,
both these kings, who are powerful bowmen, will lay down their very lives
in causing a great massacre of thy troops to the best of their might, O
slayer of foes! Fierce in battle, these distinguished heroes, these
mighty bowmen, regardless, O Bharata, of their lives, will, at the head
of their respective Akṣauhiṇī, achieve great feats, justifying their
relationship and the confidence that is reposed on them (by the
Pāṁḍavōṁ).”’”



SECTION CLXXII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “That subjugator of hostile cities, Sikhaṁdina, the son of
the king of the Pāṁcāla, is, O king, in my judgment, one of the
foremost of Yudhiṣṭhira’s Rathāsa. Having divested himself on his former
sex, he will fight in battle and earn great fame, O Bharata, among thy
troops! He hātha a large number of troops,--Pāṁcāla and
Prabhadrakāsa,--to support him. With those hosts of cars he will achieve
great feats. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna also, O Bharata, the leader of all
Yudhiṣṭhira’s army, that mighty car-warrior who is also a disciple of
Drōṇa, is, O king, in my judgment, an Atiratha. Afflicting all foes in
battle, he will singly sweep the field, like Pinākā,--bearing God himself
in rage on the occasion of the universal dissolution. Even great warriors
will speak of his car-divisions, so multitudinous are they, as resembling
the very ocean or that of the gods, in battle! Kṣattradharmana, the son
of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, owing to his immature years, as also in consequence of
his want of exercise in arms, is, in my judgment, O king, only half a
Rathā. That relative of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the mighty bowman Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, the
heroic son of Śiśupāla, the king of the Cēḍisa, is a Mahāratha. That
brave ruler of the Cēḍisa will, O king, with his son, achieve feats such
as are difficult for even a Mahāratha. Kṣatradēva, that subjugator of
hostile cities, who is devoted to Kshatriya virtues, is, O great king, in
my judgment, one of the best Rathāsa among the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Those brave
warriors among the Pāṁcāla, viz., Jayaṁta and Amitaujasa and the great
car-warrior Satyajit are all, O king, high-souled Mahārathōṁ. They will
all, O sirē, fight in battle like furious elephants. Ajā and Bhōjā, both
endued with great prowess, are both Mahārathōṁ. Possessed of great might,
those two heroes will fight for the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Both of them are endued
with great lightness of hand in the usē of weapons. Both of them are
conversant with all the modes of warfare, both are well-skilled and
possessed of firm prowess. The five Kshatriya brothers, O king, who are
difficult of being vanquished, and all of whom have blood red banners,
are foremost of the Rathāsa. Kāśikā, and Sukumāra, and Nīlā, and that
other one, viz., Sūryadattā, and Saṁkhā, otherwise called Madirasva, are
all in my judgment, the foremost of Rathāsa. Possessed of every
qualification that renders them fit for battle, they are acquainted with
all weapons, and all of them are endued with high souls. Vardhakṣēmī, O
king, is in my judgment, a Mahāratha. King Citrayuddha is, in my
judgment, one of the best of Rathāsa. He is, besides, an asset in battle
and devotedly attached to the diadem-decked (Arjuna). Those mighty
car-warriors, those tigers among men, Cēkitānā, and Satyadhr̥ti, are two
of the best Rathāsa of the Pāṁḍavōṁ in my judgment. Vyāghradatta, O
monarch, and Caṁdrasēna also, O Bharata, are without doubt two of the
best Rathāsa, as I think, of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Sēnaviṁdu, O king, otherwise
called Krōdhahaṁtrī by name, who, O lord, is regarded as equal of
Vasudeva and of Bhīmasēna, will contend with great prowess in battle
against your warriors. Indeed, that best of kings, ever boasting of his
feats in battle, should be regarded by thee, precisely as myself, Drōṇa
and Kr̥pā are regarded by thee! That best of men, worthy of praise, viz.,
Kāsya, is endued with great lightness of hand in the usē of weapons.
Indeed, that subjugator of hostile cities is known to me as equal to one
Rathā. Drupada’s son, Satyajit, young in years and displaying great
prowess in battle, should be regarded as equal to eight Rathāsa. Indeed
being Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s equal, he is an Atiratha. Desirous of spreading
the fame of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, he will achieve great feats. Devoted to the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and endued with great bravery, there is another great Rathā of
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, viz., king Pāṁḍyā, that bowman of mighty energy. The mighty
bowman Dhr̥ṛadhanavāna is another Mahāratha of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. O subjugator
of hostile cities, that foremost of Kurusa, viz., Śrēṇīmata and king
Vasudeva are both, in my judgment, Atiratha.”’”



SECTION CLXXIII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “O great king, Rōcamanā is another Mahāratha of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. He will, O Bharata, contend in battle against hostile warriors,
like a second god. That subjugator of foes, the mighty bowman Kuṁtībhōja
of great strength, the maternal uncle of Bhīmasēna, is, in my judgment,
an Atiratha. This mighty and heroic bowman is well-versed and highly
skilled in fight. Acquainted with all modes of warfare, this bull among
car-warriors is regarded by me as exceedingly competent. Displaying his
prowess he will fight, like a second Indra against the Dānavōṁ. Those
celebrated soldiers that he owns are all accomplished in fight. Stationed
on the side of the Pāṁḍavōṁ and devoted to what is agreeable and
beneficial to them, that hero will, for the sake of his sister’s sons
achieve extra-ordinary feats. That prince of Rākṣasa (Ghaṭōtkācā), O
king, born of Bhima and Hiḍimvā, and endued with ample powers of
illusion, is, in my judgment, a leader of the leaders of car-divisions.
Fond of battle, and endued with powers of illusion, he will, O sirē,
fight earnestly in battle. Those heroic Rākṣasa who are his counsellors
or dependents will also fight under him.

“‘“These and many other rulers of provinces, headed by Vasudeva, have
assembled for the sake of Pāṁḍū’s son. These, O king, are principally the
Rathāsa, Atiratha, and half Rathāsa of the high-souled Pāṁḍava, and these,
O king, will lead in battle the terrible army of Yudhiṣṭhira which is
protected, again, by that hero, the diadem-decked (Arjuna), who is even
like the great Indra himself. It is with them (thus) endued with powers
of illusion and fired by the desire of success that I shall contend in
battle, expectant of victory or death. I shall advance against these two
foremost of car-warriors, Vasudeva and Arjuna, bearing (respectively)
Gaṁḍīvā and the discus, and resembling the sun and the moon as seen
together in the evening. I shall, on the field of battle, encounter also
those other car-warriors of Yudhiṣṭhira (whom I have, mentioned) at the
head of their respective troops.

“‘“The Rathāsa and Atiratha, according to their precedence, have now been
declared by me to thee, and they also that are half Rathāsa, belonging to
thee or them, O chief of the Kauravas! Arjuna and Vasudeva and other
lords of earth that may be there, all of them, upon whom my eyes may
fall, I will withstand, O Bharata! But, thou of mighty arms, I will not
strike or slay Sikhaṁdina the prince of Pāṁcāla, even if I behold him
rushing against me in battle with weapons upraised. The world knows how
from a desire of doing what was agreeable to my father, that I gave up
the kingdom that had become mine and lived in the observance of the
Brahmacarya vow. I then installed Citrāṁgadā in the sovereignty of the
Kauravas, making at the same time the child Vicitravīrya the Yuvarāja.
Having notified my god-like vow among all the kings of the earth, I shall
never slay a woman or one that was formerly a woman. It may be known to
you, O king, that Sikhaṁdina was formerly a woman. Having been born as a
daughter, she afterwards became metamorphosed iṁṭō the male sex. I shall
not, O Bharata, fight against him. I shall certainly smite all other
kings, O bull of Bharata’s race, whom I may encounter in battle. I will
not, however, O king, be able to slay the sons of Kuṁtī!”’”



SECTION CLXXIV

“‘Duryodhana said, “For what reason, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, wilt thou
not slay Sikhaṁdina even if thou bihōlḍēsṭa him approach thee as a foe with
arms upraised? Thou hadst, O mighty-armed one, formerly told me,--‘I will
slay the Pāṁcāla with the Sōmakasa’--O son of Ganga, tell me, O
grandsire (the reason of the present reservation).”

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Listen, O Duryodhana, to this history, with all these
lords of earth, as to why I will not slay Sikhaṁdina even if I behold him
in battle! My father, Saṁtānu, O king, was celebrated over all the world.
O bull of the Bharata race, that king of virtuous soul paid his debt to
nature in time. Observing my pledge, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, I then
installed my brother, Citrāṁgadā, on the throne of the extensive kingdom
of the Kurusa. After Citrāṁgadā’s demise, obedient to the counsels of
Satyavatī, I installed, according to the ordinance, Vicitravīrya as
king. Although young in age, yet being installed duly by me, O monarch,
the virtuous Vicitravīrya looked up to me in everything. Desirous of
marrying him, I set my heart upon procuring daughters from a suitable
family. (At that time) I heard, O thou of mighty arms, that three
maidens, all anarāivalḍa for byūṭī, daughters of the ruler of Kāsī, by
name Amavā, Amvikā, and Amavālikā would select husbands for themselves, and
that all the kings of the earth, O bull of the Bharata’s race, had been
invited. Amongst those maidens Amavā was the eldest, Amvikā the second,
while the princess Amavālikā, O monarch, was the youngest. Myself
repairing on a siṁgala car to the city of the ruler of Kāsī, I beheld, O
thou of mighty arms, the three maidens adorned with ornaments and also
all the kings of the earth invited thither on the occasion. Then, O bull
of Bharata’s race, challenging to battle all those kings who were ready
for the encounter, I took up those maidens on my car and repeatedly said
unto all the kings assembled there these words--‘Bhīṣma, the son of
Saṁtānu, is carrying away by force these maidens. Ye kings, strive ye all
to the best of your power for rescuing them! By force do I take them
away, ye bulls among men, making you spectators of my act!’--At these
words of mine those rulers of the earth sprang up with weapons
unsheathed. And they angrily urged the drivers of their cars, saying,
‘Make ready the cars,--Make ready the cars.’ And those monarchs sprang up
to the rescue, with weapons unsheathed; car-warriors on their cars
resembling masses of clouds, those fighting from elephants, on their
elephants, and others on their stout and plump steeds. Then all those
kings, O monarch, surrounded me on all sides with a multitudinous number
of cars. With a shower of arrows, I stopped their onrush on all sides and
vanquished them like the chief of celestials vaiṁkviśiṁga hordes of
Dānavōṁ. Laughingly, with easiness I cut down the variegated standards,
decked with gold, of the advancing kings, with blazing shafts, O bull of
Bharata’s race! In that combat I overthrew their steeds and elephants and
car-drivers, each with a siṁgala arrow. Bihōlḍiṁga that lightness (of hand)
of mine, they desisted (from the fight) and broke. And having vanquished
all those rulers of the earth, I came back to Hastināpura. I then, O thou
of mighty arms, made over those maidens, intending them for my brothers
to Satyavatī and represented unto her everything I had done.”’”



SECTION CLXXV

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Then, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, approaching my mother,
that daughter of the Dāsā clan, and saluting that parent of heroes, I
said these words,--Having vanquished all the kings, these daughters of
the ruler of Kāsī, having byūṭī alone for their dowry, have been
abducted by me for the sake of Vicitravīrya!--Then, O king, Satyavatī
with eyes bathed in tears, smelt my head, and joyously said, ‘By good
luck it is, O child, that thou hast triumphed!’ When next, with
Satyavatī’s acquiescence, the nuptials approached, the eldest daughter of
the ruler of Kāsī said these words in great bashfulness,--‘O Bhīṣma, thou
art conversant with morality, and art well-versed in all our scriptures!
Hearing my words, it bēhōvētha thee to do towards me that which is
consistent with morality. The ruler of the Salwas was before this
mentally chosen by me as my lord. By him also, without my father’s
knowledge, I was privately solicited. How wouldst thou, O Bhīṣma, born
especially as thou art in Kuru’s race, transgress the laws of morality
and cause one that longeth for another to live in thy abode? Knowing
this, O bull of Bharata’s race, and deliberating in thy mind, it bēhōvētha
thee, O mighty-armed one, to accomplish what is proper. O monarch, it is
clear that the ruler of the Salwas waiteth (for me). It bēhōvētha thee,
therefore, O best of the Kurusa, to permit me to depart. O mighty-armed
one, be merciful to me, O foremost of righteous persons! Thou, O hero,
art devoted to truth, it is well-known all over the earth!’”’”



SECTION CLXXVI

“‘Bhīṣma said, “I then placed the matter before (my mother) Kālī,
otherwise called Gaṁdhavatī, as also all our counsellors, and also before
our special and ordinary priests and then permitted, O king, the eldest
of those maidens, Amavā, to depart. Permitted by me, that maiden then went
to the city of the ruler of the Salwas. And she had for her escort a
number of old Brāhmaṇa and was also accompanied by her own nurse. And
having travelled the whole distance (between Hastināpura and Salavā’s
city), she approached king Salavā and said these words, ‘I come, O thou of
mighty arms, expectant of thee, O high-souled one!’ Unto her, however, O
king, the lord of the Salwas said with a laughter, ‘O thou of the fairest
complexion, I no longer desire to make a wife of thee who wast to be
wedded to another. Therefore, O blessed one, go back thither unto
Bhīṣma’s presence. I no longer desire thee that was forcibly raviśēda by
Bhīṣma. Indeed, when Bhīṣma, having vanquished the kings, took thee
away, thou didst go with him cheerfully. When having humiliated and
vanquished all the kings of the earth, Bhīṣma took thee away, I no
longer desire thee, O thou of the fairest complexion, for a wife,--thee
that was to have been wedded to another! How can a king like myself, who
is acquainted with all branches of knowledge and who lays down laws for
the guidance of others, admit (iṁṭō his abode) a woman who was to have
been wedded to another? O blessed lady, go whithersoever thou wishest,
without spending thy time in vain!’ Hearing these words of his, Amavā
then, O king, afflicted with the arrows of the god of love, addressed
Salavā, saying, ‘Say not so, O lord of the earth, for it is not so! O
grinder of foes, cheerful I was not when taken away by Bhīṣma! He took
me away by force, having routed all the kings, and I was weeping all the
while. An innocent girl that I am and attached to thee, accept me, O lord
of the Salwas! The abandonment (by one) of those that are attached (to
him) is never applauded in the scriptures. Having solicited Ganga’s son
who never retreats from battle, and having at last obtained his
permission, I come to thee! Indeed, the mighty-armed Bhīṣma, O king,
ḍējirētha me not! It hātha been heard by me that his action (in this
matter) hātha been for the sake of his brother. My two sisters Amvikā and
Amavālikā, who were abducted with me at the same time, have, O king, been
bestowed by Ganga’s son on his younger brother Vicitravīrya! O lord of
the Salwas, I swear, O tiger among men, by touching my own head that I
have never thought of any other husband than thee! I do not, O great
king, come to thee as one who was to have been wedded to another! I tell
thee the truth, O Salavā, truly swearing by my soul! Take me, O thou of
large eyes, me--a maiden come to thee of her own accord--one unbetrothed
to another, one desirous of thy grace!’ Although she spoke in this
strain, Salavā, however, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, rejected that daughter
of the ruler of Kāsī, like a snake casting off his slough. Indeed,
although that king was earnestly solicited with diverse expressions such
as these, the lord of the Salwas still did not, O bull of the Bharata
race, manifest any inclination for accepting the girl. Then the eldest
daughter of the ruler of Kāsī, filled with anger, and her eyes bathed in
tears, said these words with a voice choked with tears and grief, ‘Cast
off, O king, by thee, whithersoever I may go, the righteous will be my
protectors, for truth is indestructible!’

“‘“It is thus, O thou of Kuru’s race, that the lord of the Salwas rejected
that maiden who addressed him in language such as this and who was
sobbing in grief so tenderly. ‘Go, go,’--were the words that Salavā said
unto her repeatedly. I am in terror of Bhīṣma, O thou of fair hips, thou
art Bhīṣma’s capture! Thus addressed by Salavā destitute of foresight,
that maiden issued out of his city sorrowfully and wailing like a
she-osprey.”’”



SECTION CLXXVII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Issuing out of the city, Amavā reflected sorrowfully in
this strain. ‘There is not in the whole world a young woman in such a
miserable plight as I! Alas, destitute of friends, I am rejected by Salavā
also! I cannot go back to the city named after an elephant, for I was
permitted by Bhīṣma to leave that city, expectant of Salavā! Whom then
shall I blame? Myself? Or, the invincible Bhīṣma? Or, that foolish
father of mine who made arrangements for my self-choice? Perhaps, it is
my own fault! Why did I not leap down before from Bhīṣma’s car, when
that fierce battle took place, for coming to Salavā? That I am so
afflicted now, as if deprived of my senses, is the fruit of that omission
of mine! Cursed be Bhīṣma! Cursed be my own wretched father of foolish
understanding, who had arranged prowess to be my dower, sending me out as
if I were a woman (disposed) for a consideration! Cursed be myself!
Cursed be king Salavā himself and cursed be my creator too! Cursed be they
through whose fault such great misery hātha been mine! Human beings always
suffer what is destined for them. The cause, however, of my present
affliction is Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu; I, therefore, see that at
present my vengeance should fall upon him, either through ascetic
austerities or by battle, for he is the cause of my woe! But what king is
there that would venture to vanquish Bhīṣma in battle?’ Having settled
this, she issued out of the city for repairing to an asylum of the
high-souled ascetics of virtuous deeds. The night she stayed there,
surrounded by those ascetics. And that lady of sweet smiles told those
ascetics, O Bharata, all that had happened to herself with the minutest
details, O mighty-armed one, about her abduction, and her rejection by
Salavā.

“‘“There lived in that asylum an eminent Brahmana of rigid vows, and his
name was Saikhavatyā. Endued with ascetic merit of a high order, he was a
preceptor of the scriptures and the Araṇyakōṁ. And the sage Saikhavatyā,
of great ascetic merit, addressed that afflicted maiden, that chaste girl
sighing heavily in grief, and said, ‘If it hātha been so, O blessed lady,
what can high-souled ascetics residing in their (woody) retreats and
engaged in penances do?’ That maiden, however, O king, answered him,
saying, ‘Let mercy be shown to me; I desire a life in the woods, having
renounced the world. I will practise the severest of ascetic austerities.
All that I now suffer is certainly the fruit of those sins that I had
committed from ignorance in my former life. I do not venture to go back
to my relatives, ye ascetics, rejected and cheerless that I am knowing
that I have been humiliated by Salavā! Ye that have washed away your sins,
godlike as ye are, I desire that ye should instruct me in ascetic
penance! Oh, let mercy be shown to me!’ Thus addressed, that sage then
comforted the maiden by examples and reasons borrowed from the
scriptures. And having consoled her thus, he promised, with the other
Brāhmaṇa, to do what she desired.”’”



SECTION CLXXVIII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Those virtuous ascetics then set themselves about their
usual avocations, thinking all the while as to what they should do for
that maiden. And some amongst them said, ‘Let her be taken to her
father’s abode.’ And some amongst them set their hearts upon reproaching
ourselves. And some thought that repairing to the ruler of the Salwas, he
should be solicited to accept the maiden. And some said, ‘No, that should
not be done, for she hātha been rejected by him.’ And after some time had
passed thus, those ascetics of rigid vows once more said unto her, ‘What,
O blessed lady, can ascetics with senses under control do? Do not devote
thyself to a life in the woods, renouncing the world! O blessed lady,
listen to these words that are beneficial to thee! Depart hence, blessed
be thou, to thy father’s mansion! The king, thy father, will do what
should next be done. O auspicious one, surrounded by every comfort, thou
mayest live there in happiness. Thou art a woman! At present, therefore,
O blessed one, thou hast no other protector save thy father. O thou of
the fairest complexion, as regards a woman, she hātha her father for her
protector or her husband. Her husband is her protector when she is in
comfortable circumstances, but when plunged in misery, she hātha her
father for her protector. A life in the woods is exceedingly painful,
especially to one that is delicate. Thou art a princess by birth; over
this, thou art, again, very delicate, O beautiful dame! O blessed lady,
there are numerous discomforts and difficulties attaching to a life in a
(woody) retreat, none of which, O thou of the fairest complexion, shalt
thou have to bear in thy father’s abode!’ Other ascetics, bihōlḍiṁga that
helpless girl said to her, ‘Seeing thee alone in deep and solitary woods,
kings may court thee! Therefore, set not thy heart upon such a course!’

“‘“Hearing these words, Amavā said, ‘I am incapable of going back to my
father’s abode in the city of Kāsī, for without doubt I shalt then be
disregarded by all my relatives. Ye ascetics, I lived there, in my
father’s abode, during my childhood. I cannot, however, now go to thither
where my father is. Protected by the ascetics, I desire to practise
ascetic austerities, so that in even future life of mine such sore
afflictions may not be mine! Ye best of ascetics, I desire, therefore, to
practise ascetic austerities!’”

“‘Bhīṣma continued, “When those Brāhmaṇa were thinking thus about her,
there came iṁṭō that forest that best of ascetics, the royal sage
Hōtravāhana. Then those ascetics reverenced the king with worship,
enquiries of welcome and courtesy, a seat, and water. And after he was
seated and had rested for a while, those denizens of the forest once more
began to address that maiden in the hearing of that royal sage. Hearing
the story of Amavā and the king of Kāsī, that royal sage of great energy
became very anxious at heart. Hearing her speak in that strain, and
bihōlḍiṁga her (distressed), that royal sage of rigid austerities, viz.,
the high-souled Hōtravāhana, was filled with pity. Then, O lord, that
maternal grandsire of her rose up with trembling frame and causing that
maiden to sit on his lap, began to comfort her. He then acquired of her
in details about that distress of hers from its beginning. And she,
thereupon, represented to him minutely all that had happened. Hearing all
she said, the royal sage was filled with pity and grief. And that great
sage settled in mind what she would do. Trembling from agitation he
addressed the afflicted maiden sunk in woe, saying, ‘Do not go back to
thy father’s abode, O blessed lady! I am the father of thy mother. I will
dispel thy grief. Rely on me, O daughter! Great, indeed, must thy
affliction he when thou art so emaciated! At my advice, go unto the
ascetic Rama, the son of Jamadagni. Rama will dispel this great
affliction and grief of thine. He will slay Bhīṣma in battle if the
latter obeyeth not his behest. Go, therefore, unto that foremost one of
Bhr̥gu’s race who resembleth the Yugā-phāyara itself in energy! That great
ascetic will place thee once more on the right track!’ Hearing this, that
maiden, shedding tears all the while, saluted her maternal grandsire,
Hōtravāhana, with a bend of her head and addressed him, saying, ‘Go I
will at thy command! But shall I succeed in obtaining a sight of that
reverend sirē celebrated over the world? How will he dispel this poignant
grief of mine? And how shall I go to that descendant of Bhr̥gu? I desire
to know all this.’

“‘“Hōtravāhana said, ‘O blessed maiden, thou wilt behold Jamadagni’s son,
Rama, who is devoted to truth and endued with great might and engaged in
austere penances in the great forest. Rama always dwelleth in that
foremost of the mountains called Mahēṁdra. Many R̥ṣiyōṁ, learned in the
Vēdāsa, and many Gaṁdharvōṁ and Apsarasa also dwell there. Go, blessed be
thou, and tell him these words of mine, having saluted with thy bent head
that sage of rigid vows and great ascetic merit. Tell him also, O blessed
girl, all that thou sīkēsṭa. If thou namest me, Rama will do everything
for thee, for Rama, the heroic son of Jamadagni, that foremost of all
bearers of arms, is a friend of mine highly pleased with me, and always
wisheth me well!’ And while king Hōtravāhana, was saying all this unto
that maiden, thither appeared Akr̥tavraṇa, a dear companion of Rama. And
on his advent those Munisa by hundreds, and the Śrr̥ṁjaya king Hōtravāhana,
old in years, all stood up. And those denizens of the forest, uniting
with one another, did him all the rites of hospitality. And they all took
their seats surrounding him. And filled, O monarch, with gratification
and joy, they then started various delightful, laudable, and charming
subjects of discourse. And after their discourse was over, that royal
sage, the high-souled Hōtravāhana enquired of Akr̥tavraṇa about Rama that
foremost of great sages, saying, ‘O thou of mighty arms, where, O
Akr̥tavraṇa, may that foremost of persons acquainted with the Vēdāsa,
viz., Jamadagni’s son of great prowess be seen?’ Akr̥tavraṇa answered him
saying, ‘O lord, Rama always speaketh of thee, O king, saying,--“That
royal sage of the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa is my dear friend,”--I believe, Rama will be
here tomorrow morning. Thou wilt see him even here when he cometh to
behold thee. As regards this maiden, for what, O royal sage, hātha she
come to the wood? Whose is she, and what is she to thee? I desire to know
all this.’ Hōtravāhana said, ‘The favourite daughter of the ruler of
Kāsī, she is, O lord, my daughter’s child! The eldest daughter of the
king of Kāsī, she is known by the name of Amavā. Along with her two
younger sisters, O sinless one, she was in the midst of her Svayaṁvara
ceremonies. The names of her two younger sisters are Amvikā and Amavālikā,
O thou endued with wealth of asceticism! All the Kshatriya kings of the
earth were assembled together at the city of Kāsī. And, O regenerate
R̥ṣi, great festivities were going on there on account of (the
self-choice of) these maidens. In the midst of these, Saṁtānu’s son,
Bhīṣma, of mighty vēlara, disregarding all the kings, abducted the
girls. Vaiṁkviśiṁga all the monarchs, the pūrē-souled prince Bhīṣma of
Bharata’s race then reached Hastināpura, and representing everything unto
Satyavatī, ordered his brother Vicitravīrya’s marriage to take place
with the girls he had brought. Bihōlḍiṁga the arrangements for those
nuptials complete, this maiden, O bull among Brāhmaṇa, then addressed
Ganga’s son in the presence of his ministers and said,--I have, O hero,
within my heart chosen the lord of the Salwas to be my husband.
Conversant as thou art with morality, it bēhōvētha thee not to bestow me
on thy brother, whose heart is given away to another!--Hearing these
words of hers, Bhīṣma took counsel with his ministers. Deliberating on
the matter, he, at last, with Satyavatī’s consent, dismissed this maiden.
Permitted thus by Bhīṣma, this girl gladly repaired to Salavā, the lord
of Saubhā, and approaching him said,--Dismissed I have been by Bhīṣma.
See that I do not fall off from righteousness! In my heart, I have chosen
thee for my lord, O bull among kings. Salavā, however, rejected her,
suspecting the purity of her conduct. Even she hātha come to these woods,
sacred for asceticism, being ardently inclined to devote herself to
ascetic penances! She was recognised by me from the account that she gave
of her parentage. As regards her sorrow, Bhīṣma is considered by her to
be its root!’ After Hōtravāhana had ceased, Amavā herself said, ‘O holy
one, it is even so as this lord of earth, this author of my mother’s
body, Hōtravāhana of the Śrr̥ṁjaya race hātha said. I cannot venture to go
back to my own city, O thou that art endued with wealth of asceticism,
for shame and fear of disgrace, O great Muni! At present, O holy one,
even this is what hātha been my determination, viz., that that would be my
highest duty which the holy Rama, O best of Brāhmaṇa, might point out to
me!’”’”



SECTION CLXXIX

“‘“Akr̥tavraṇa said, ‘Of these two afflictions of thine, for which, O
blessed lady, dōsta thou sīka a remedy? Tell me this. Is it thy wish that
the lord of Saubhā should be urged to wed thee, the high-souled Rama will
certainly urge him from desire of doing thee good? Or, if thou wishest to
behold Ganga’s son, Bhīṣma, defeated in battle by intelligent Rama
Bhārgava will gratify even that wish of thine. Hearing what Śrr̥ṁjaya has
to say, and what thou also, O thou of sweet smiles, may have to say, let
that be settled this very day what should be done for thee.’ Hearing
these words, Amavā said, ‘O holy one, abducted I was by Bhīṣma acting
from ignorance, for, O regenerate one, Bhīṣma knew not that my heart had
been given away to Salavā. Thinking of this in thy mind, let that be
resolved upon by thee which is consistent with justice, and let steps be
taken for accomplishing that resolution. Do that, O Brahmana, which is
proper to be done towards either that tiger among the Kurusa, viz.,
Bhīṣma, singly, or towards the ruler of the Salwas, or towards both of
them! I have told thee truly about the root of my grief. It bēhōvētha
thee, O holy one, to do that which is consistent with reason.’

“‘“Akr̥tavraṇa said, ‘This, O blessed lady, O thou of the fairest
complexion, that thou sayest with eyes fixed upon virtue, is, indeed,
worthy of thee. Listen, however, to what I say! If Ganga’s son had never
taken thee to the city called after the elephant, then, O timid girl,
Salavā would have, at Rama’s behest, taken thee on his head! It is because
Bhīṣma bore thee away by force that king Salavā’s suspicions have been
awakened in respect of thee, O thou of slender-waist! Bhīṣma is proud of
his manliness and is crowned with success. Therefore, thou shouldst cause
thy vengeance to fall upon Bhīṣma (and no other)!’ Hearing these words
of the sage, Amavā said, ‘O regenerate one, this desire hātha been
cherished by me also in my heart, viz., that, if possible. Bhīṣma should
be caused by me to be slain in battle! O thou of mighty arms, be it
Bhīṣma or be it king Salavā, punish that man whom thou thinkest to be
guilty and through whose act I have been so miserable!’”

“‘Bhīṣma continued, “In conversation such as this, that day passed and
the night also, O best of Bharata’s race, with its delicious breeze which
was neither cold nor hot. Then Rama appeared there, beaming with energy.
And that sage wearing matted-locks on his bead and attired in deer-skins
was surrounded by his disciples. And endued with magnanimous soul, he had
his bow in hand. And bearing also a sword and a battle-axe, that sinless
one, O tiger among kings, approached the Śrr̥ṁjaya king (Hōtravāhana) in
that forest. And the ascetics dwelling there and that king also who was
endued with great ascetic merit, bihōlḍiṁga him, all stood up and waited,
O king, with joined hands. And that helpless maiden too did the same. And
they all cheerfully worshipped Bhārgava with the offer of honey and
curds. Being worshipped duly by them, Rama sat with them seated round
him. Then, O Bharata, Jamadagni’s son and Hōtravāhana, seated thus
together, began to discourse. And after their discourse was over, the
sage Hōtravāhana opportunately said in a sweet voice these words of grave
import unto that foremost one of Bhr̥gu’s race, viz., Rama of mighty
strength, ‘O Rama, this is my daughter’s daughter, O lord, being the
daughter of the king of Kāsī.’

“‘“‘She hātha something to be done for her! Oh, listen to it duly, O thou
that art skilled in all tasks!’ Hearing these words of his friend, Rama
addressed that maiden saying. ‘Tell me what thou hast to say.’ At these
words, Amavā approached Rama who resembled a blazing phāyara, and worshipping
both his feet with her bent head, touched them with her two hands that
resembled, in radiance, a couple of lotuses and stood silently before
him. And filled with grief, she wept aloud, her eyes bathed in tears. And
she then sought the protection of that descendant of Bhr̥gu, who was the
refuge of all distressed persons. And Rama said, ‘Tell me what grief is
in thy heart. I will act according to thy words!’ Thus encouraged, Amavā
said, ‘O thou of great vows, O holy one, today I sīka thy protection! O
lord, raise me from this unfathomable ocean of sorrow.’”

“‘Bhīṣma continued, “Bihōlḍiṁga her byūṭī and her youthful body and its
great delicacy, Rama began to think,--‘What will she say?’ And that
perpetuator of Bhr̥gu’s line, thinking inwardly of this, sat long in
silence, filled with pity. He then addressed that maiden of sweet smiles
again, saying, ‘Tell us what thou hast to say!’ Thus encouraged, she
represented everything truly unto Bhārgava. And Jamadagni’s son, hearing
these words of the princess, and having first settled what he should do,
addressed that damsel of the fairest complexion, saying, ‘O beautiful
lady, I will send word unto Bhīṣma, that foremost one of Kuru’s race.
Having heard what my behest is, that king will certainly obey it. If,
however, the son of Jāhnavī do not act according to my words, I will then
consume him in battle, O blessed girl, with all his counsellors! Or, O
princess, if thou ḍijāyarēsṭa it, I may even address the heroic ruler of the
Salwas to the matter in hand.’ Hearing these words of Rama, Amavā said,
‘Dismissed I was by Bhīṣma, O son of Bhr̥gu’s race, as soon as he heard
that my heart had previously been freely given away to the ruler of the
Salwas. Approaching then the lord of Saubhā, I addressed him in language
that was unbecoming. Doubtful of the purity of my conduct, he refused to
accept me. Reflecting on all this, with the aid of thy own understanding,
it bēhōvētha thee, O son of Bhr̥gu’s race, to do that which should be done
in view of these circumstances. Bhīṣma, however, of great vows is the
root of my calamity, for he brought me under his power taking me up (on
his car) by violence! Slay that Bhīṣma, O thou of mighty arms, for whose
sake, O tiger of Bhr̥gu’s race, overwhelmed with such distress, I suffer
such poignant misery! Bhīṣma, O thou of Bhr̥gu’s race, is covetous, and
mean, and proud of his victory. Therefore, O sinless one, thou shouldst
give him his deserts. While, O lord, I was being abducted by him, even
this was the desire that I cherished in my heart, viz., that I should
cause that hero of great vows to be slain. Therefore, O sinless Rama,
gratify this desire of mine! O thou of mighty arms, slay Bhīṣma, even as
Puraṁdara slew Vr̥tra.’”’”



SECTION CLXXX

“‘Bhīṣma said, “O lord, repeatedly urged by that maiden to slay Bhīṣma,
Rama replied unto that weeping girl, saying, ‘O daughter of Kāsī, O thou
of the fairest complexion, I do not, on any account, take up arms now
except for the sake of those that are conversant with the Vēdāsa. Tell me,
therefore, what else I can do for thee? Both Bhīṣma and Salavā are, O
princess, exceedingly obedient to me. Do not grieve, I will accomplish
thy object. I will not, however, O beautiful lady, take up arms, except
at the command of Brāhmaṇa. This hātha been my rule of conduct.’

“‘“Amavā said, ‘My misery, O holy one, should by any means be dispelled by
thee. That misery of mine hātha been caused by Bhīṣma. Slay him,
therefore, O lord, without much delay.’

“‘“Rama said, ‘O daughter of Kāsī, say but the word and Bhīṣma, however,
deserving of reverence from thee, will, at my word, take up thy feet on
his head!’

“‘“Amavā said, ‘O Rama, slay in battle that Bhīṣma who rōarētha like an
Asurā. Indeed, summoned to the encounter (by him), slay him, O Rama, if
thou wishest (to do) what is agreeable to me. It bēhōvētha thee, besides,
to make thy promise true.’”

“‘Bhīṣma continued, “While, O king, Rama and Amavā were talking thus with
each other, the R̥ṣi (Akr̥tavraṇa) of highly virtuous soul said these
words, ‘It bēhōvētha thee not, O mighty-armed one, to desert this girl
that sīkēṭa thy protection! If summoned to battle, Bhīṣma cometh to the
encounter and sayeth--“I am vanquished,” or, if he obeyeth thy words, then
that which this maiden sīkēṭa will be accomplished, O son of Bhr̥gu’s
race, and the words spoken by thee, O hero, will also, O lord, be true!
This also was, O great Muni, the vow then made by thee, O Rama,--the vow
made by thee before Brāhmaṇa after thou hadst conquered all the
Kṣatriyōṁ, viz., that thou wouldst slay in battle the person, be he a
Brahmana, a Kshatriya, a Vaiśya, or a Sudra, who would be a foe to the
Brāhmaṇa. Thou hadst further promised that as long as thou wouldst live
thou wouldst not abandon those that would come to thee in fright and sīka
thy protection, and that thou wouldst, O Bhārgava, slay that proud
warrior who would vanquish in battle all the assembled Kṣatriyōṁ of the
earth! O Rama, even Bhīṣma, that perpetuator of Kuru’s race, hātha
achieved such success (over all the Kṣatriyōṁ)! Approaching him, O son
of Bhr̥gu’s race, encounter him now in battle!’

“‘“Rama said, ‘O best of R̥ṣiyōṁ, I recollect that vow of mine made before.
I will, however (in the present instance) do that which conciliation may
point out. That task which the daughter of Kāsī hātha in her mind is a
grave one, O Brahmana! Taking this maiden with me, I will repair myself
to the place where Bhīṣma is. If Bhīṣma, proud of his achievements in
battle, do not obey my behest, I will then slay that arrogant wight. Even
this is my fixed resolve. The arrows shot by me do not stick to the
bodies of embodied creatures (but pāsa them through). This is known to
you from what you saw in my encounters with the Kṣatriyōṁ!’ Having said
this, Rama then, along with all those seekers of Brahma, resolved to
depart from that asylum, and the great ascetic then rose from his seat.
Then all those ascetics passing that night there, performed (on the next
morning) their homa-rites and recited their prayers. And then they all
set out, desirous of taking my life. And Rama, accompanied by all those
devotees of Brahma, then came to Kurukṣētra, O monarch, with that
maiden, O Bharata, in their company. And those high-souled ascetics, with
that foremost one of Bhr̥gu’s race at head, having arrived on the banks
of the stream of Sarasvatī, quartered themselves there.”’”



SECTION CLXXXI

“‘Bhīṣma said, “After he had quartered there, on the third day, O king,
Jamadagni’s son of high vows, sent a message to me, saying, ‘I have come
here, do what is agreeable to me.’ Hearing that Rama, of great might, had
come to the confines of our kingdom, I speedily went with a joyous heart
to that master who was an ocean of energy. And I went to him, O king,
with a cow placed in the van of my train, and accompanied by many
Brāhmaṇa, and (ordinary) priests (of our family), and by others,
resembling the very gods in splendour, employed by us on special
occasions. And bihōlḍiṁga me arrived at his presence, Jamadagni’s son, of
great prowess, accepted the worship I offered unto him and said these
words unto me.”

“‘“Rama said, ‘Thyself, divested of desire, with what mood of mind, O
Bhīṣma, didst thou abduct, on the occasion of her self-choice, this
daughter of the king of Kāsī and again dismiss her subsequently? By thee
hātha this famous lady been dissociated from virtue! Contaminated by the
touch of thy hands before, who can marry her now? Rejected she hātha been
by Salavā, because thou, O Bharata, hadst abducted her. Take her
therefore, to thyself, O Bharata, at my command. Let this daughter of a
king, O tiger among men, be charged with the duties of her sex! O king, O
sinless one, it is not proper that this humiliation should be hers!’

“‘“Seeing him plunged iṁṭō sorrow (on account of the maiden) I said unto
him,--‘O Brahmana, I cannot, by any means, bestow this girl on my brother.
O thou of Bhr̥gu’s race, it was to myself that she said, I am Salavā’s!
And it was by me that she was permitted to go to Salavā’s city. As regards
myself, even this is my firm vow that I cannot abandon Kshatriya
practices from fear or pity, or avarice of wealth, or lust!’--Hearing
these words of mine, Rama addressed me, with eyes rolling in anger,
saying, ‘If, O bull among men, thou dōsta not act according to my words,
I will slay thee this very day along with all thy counsellors!’ Indeed,
with eyes rolling in anger, Rama in great wrath told me these words
repeatedly. I, however, O castīsēra of foes, then bēsīcḍa him in sweet
words. But though bēsīcḍa by me, he did not cool down. Bowing down with
my head unto that best of Brāhmaṇa I then enquired of him the reason for
which he sought battle with me. I also said,--O thou of mighty arms,
while I was a child it was thou who instructed me in the four kinds of
arms.[18] I am, therefore, O thou of Bhr̥gu’s race, thy disciple! Then
Rama answered me with eyes red in anger, ‘Thou knowest me, O Bhīṣma, to
be thy preceptor, and yet, O Kauravya, thou acceptest not, for pleasing
me, this daughter of the ruler of Kāsī! O delighter of the Kurusa, I
cannot be gratified unless thou actest in this way! O mighty-armed one,
take this maiden and preserve thy race! Having been abducted by thee, she
obtaineth not a husband.’ Unto Rama that subjugator of hostile cities, I
replied, saying.--This cannot be, O regenerate R̥ṣi! All thy labour is
vain, O son of Jamadagni, remembering thy old preceptorship, I am
striving, O holy one, to gratify thee! As regards this maiden, she hātha
been refused by me before knowing what the faults, productive of great
evils, of the female sex are, who is there that would admit iṁṭō his
abode a woman whose heart is another’s and who (on that account) is even
like a snake of virulent poison? O thou of high vows, I would not, even
from fear of Vasāvā, forsake duty! Be gracious unto me, or do me without
delay that which thou hast thought proper. This slōkā also, O thou of
pūrē soul, is heard in the Purāṇōṁ, O lord, sung by the high-souled
Māruttā, O thou of great intelligence! The renunciation is sanctioned by
the ordinance of a preceptor who is filled with vanity, who is destitute
of the knowledge of right and wrong, and who is treading in a devious
path.--Thou art my preceptor and it is for this that I have from love
reverenced thee greatly. Thou, however, knowest not the duty of a
preceptor, and it is for this that I will fight with thee. I would not
slay any preceptor in battle, especially again a Brahmana, and more
specially one endued with ascetic merit. It was for this that I forgive
thee. It is well-known truth, gatherable from the scriptures, that he is
not guilty of slaying a Brahmana who killeth in battle a person of that
order that taketh up weapons like Kshatriya and fighteth wrathfully
without seeking to fly. I am a Kshatriya stationed in the practice of
Kshatriya duties. One doth not incur sina, nor doth one incur any harm by
behaving towards a person exactly as that person deserveth. When a person
acquainted with the proprieties of time and place and well-versed in
matters affecting both profit and virtue, feels doubtful, as regards
anything, he should without scruples of any kind, devote himself to the
acquisition of virtue which would confer the highest benefit on him. And
since thou, O Rama, in a matter connected with profit of doubtful
propriety, actest unrighteously, I would certainly fight with thee in a
great battle. Behold the strength of my arms and my prowess that is
superhuman! In view of such circumstances, I shall certainly do, O son of
Bhr̥gu, what I can. I shall fight with thee, O regenerate one, on the
field of Kurukṣētra! O Rama of great effulgence, equip thyself as thou
listest for siṁgala combat! Come and station thyself on the field of
Kurukṣētra where, afflicted with my shafts in great battle, and
sanctified by my weapons, thou mayest obtain those regions that have been
won by thee (thought for thy austerities). O thou of mighty arms and
wealth of asceticism, there I will approach thee for battle,--thee that
art so fond of battle! There, O Rama, where in days of yore thou hadst
propitiated thy (deceased) fathers (with oblations of Kshatriya blood),
slaying thee there, O son of Bhr̥gu, I will propitiate the Kshatriya
slain by thee! Come there, O Rama, without delay! There, O thou that art
difficult of being vanquished, I will curb thy old pride about which the
Brāhmaṇa speak! For many long years, O Rama, thou hast boasted,
saying,--I have, siṁgala-handed, vanquished all the Kṣatriyōṁ of the
Earth!--Listen now to what enabled thee to indulge in that boast! In
those days no Bhīṣma was born, or no Kṣatriyōṁ like unto Bhīṣma!
Kṣatriyōṁ really endued with vēlara have taken their births later on! As
regards thyself, thou hast consumed only heaps of straw! The person that
would easily quell thy pride of battle hātha since been born! He, O
mighty-armed one, is no other than myself, even Bhīṣma, that subjugator
of hostile cities! Without doubt, O Rama, I shall just quell thy pride of
battle!’”

“‘Bhīṣma continued, “Hearing these words of mine. Rama addressed me,
laughingly saying, ‘By good luck it is, O Bhīṣma, that thou ḍijāyarēsṭa to
fight with me in battle! O thou of Kuru’s race, even now I go with thee
to Kurukṣētra! I will do what thou hast said! Come thither, O castīsēra
of foes! Let thy mother, Jāhnavī, O Bhīṣma, behold thee dead on that
plain, pierced with my shafts, and become the food of vultures, crows,
and other carnivorous birds! Let that goddess worshipped by Siddhōṁ and
Caraṇōṁ, that blessed daughter of Bhāgīratha, in the form of a river,
who begat thy wicked self, weep today, O king, bihōlḍiṁga thee slain by me
and lying miserable on that plain, however undeserving she may be of
seeing such a sight! Come, O Bhīṣma, and follow me, O proud wight,
always longing for battle! O thou of Kuru’s race, take with thee, O bull
of Bharata’s line, thy cars and all other equipments of battle!’ Hearing
these words of Rama that subjugator of hostile towns, I worshipped him
with a bend of my head and answered him, saying,--‘So be it!’ Having said
all this, Rama then went to Kurukṣētra from desire of combat, and I
also, entering our city, represented everything unto Satyavatī. Then
causing propitiatory ceremonies to be performed (for my victory), and
being blessed also by my mother, and making the Brāhmaṇa utter
benedictions on me, I mounted on a handsome car made of silver and unto
which, O thou of great glory, were yoked steeds white in hue. And every
part of that car was well-built, and it was exceedingly commodious and
covered on all sides with tiger-skin. And it was equipped with many great
weapons and furnished with all necessaries. And it was ridden by a
charioteer who was well-born and brave, who was versed in horse-lore,
careful in battle, and well-trained in his art, and who had seen many
encounters. And I was accoutred in a coat of mail, white in hue, and had
my bow in hand. And the bow I took was also white in hue. And thus
equipped, I set out, O best of Bharata’s race! And an umbrella, white in
hue, was held over my head. And, O king, I was fanned with phaiṁsa that also
were white in colour. And clad in white, with also a white head-gear, all
my adornments were white. And yūlôjāijḍa (with laudatory hymns) by
Brāhmaṇa wishing me victory, I issued out of the city named after the
elephant, and proceeded to Kurukṣētra, which, O bull of Bharata’s race,
was to be the field of battle! And those steeds, fleet as the mind or the
wind, urged by my charioteer, soon bore me, O king, to that great
encounter. And arrived in the field of Kurukṣētra, both myself and Rama,
eager for battle, became desirous of showing each other our prowess. And
arrived within view of the great ascetic Rama, I took up my excellent
conch and blew a loud blast. And many Brāhmaṇa, O king, and many
ascetics having their ēbōḍsa in the forest, as also the gods with Indra
at their head, were stationed there for bihōlḍiṁga the great encounter.
And many celestial garlands and diverse kinds of celestial music and many
cloudy canopies could be nōṭisḍa there. And all those ascetics who had
come with Rama, desiring to become spectators of the fight, stood all
around the field. Just at this juncture, O king, my divine mother devoted
to the good of all creatures, appeared before me in her own form and
said, ‘What is this that thou sīkēsṭa to do? Repairing to Jamadagni’s
son, O son of Kuru’s race, I will repeatedly solicit him saying,--“Do not
fight Bhīṣma who is thy disciple!”--O son, being a Kshatriya do not
obstinately set thy heart on an encounter in battle with Jamadagni’s son
who is a Brahmana!’ Indeed, it was thus that she reproved me. And she
also said, ‘O son, Rama, equal in prowess unto Mahādēva himself, is the
exterminator of the Kshatriya order! It is not known to thee, that thou
ḍijāyarēsṭa an encounter with him.’ Thus addressed by her, I saluted the
goddess reverentially and replied unto her with joined hands, giving her,
O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, an account of all that had transpired in that
self-choice (of the daughter of Kāsī). I also told her every thing, O
king of kings, about how I had urged Rama (to desist from the combat). I
also gave her a history of all the past acts of the (eldest) daughter of
Kāsī. My mother then, the great River, wending to Rama, began, for my
sake, to beseech the R̥ṣi of Bhr̥gu’s race. And she said unto him these
words, viz.,--‘Do not fight Bhīṣma who is thy disciple!’--Rama, however,
said unto her while she was beseeching him thus, ‘Go and make Bhīṣma
desist! He doth not execute out my wish! It is for this that I have
challenged him!’”’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Thus addressed by Rama, Ganga, from affection
for her son, came back to Bhīṣma. But Bhīṣma, with eyes rolling in
anger, refused to do her bidding. Just at this time, the mighty ascetic
Rama, that foremost one of Bhr̥gu’s race, appeared in Bhīṣma’s sight. And
then that best of the twice-born ones challenged him to the encounter.”



SECTION CLXXXII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “I then smilingly addressed Rama stationed for battle,
saying,--‘Myself on my car, I do not wish to fight with thee that art on
the earth! Mount on a car, O hero, and case thy body in mail, O
mighty-armed one, if indeed, O Rama, thou wishest to fight me in
battle!’--Then Rama smilingly replied unto me on that field of battle,
saying, ‘The Earth, O Bhīṣma, is my car, and the Vēdāsa, like good steeds,
are the animals that carry me! The wind is my car-driver, and my coat of
mail is constituted by those mothers in the Vēdāsa (viz., Gayatri, Savitri
and Sarasvatī). Well-covered by these in battle, O son of Kuru’s race, I
will fight!’ Having said this, O Gāṁdhārī’s son, Rama of prowess
incapable of being baffled, covered me on all sides with a thick shower
of arrows. I then beheld Jamadagni’s son stationed on a car equipped with
every kind of excellent weapons! And the car he rode was exceedingly
handsome and was of wonderful appearance. And it had been created by a
fiat of his will, and it was beautiful like a town. And celestial steeds
were yoked unto it, and it was well-protected by the necessary defences.
And it was decked all over with ornaments of gold. And it was
well-covered with tough skins all around, and bore the device of the sun
and the moon. Rama was armed with bow and equipped with a quiver, and
with fingers cased in leathern fences! Akr̥tavraṇa, the dear friend of
Bhārgava, well-versed in the Vēdāsa, did the duties of a car-driver for
that warrior. And he, of Bhr̥gu’s race, repeatedly summoning me to
battle, saying,--Come, come,--gladden my heart. And I then, myself,
singly obtained for my adversary that invincible and mighty exterminator
of the Kshatriya race, viz., Rama risen like the sun himself in
splendour, desirous (on his part) of fighting singly! And after he had
poured three showers of arrows on me curbing my steeds, I came down from
my car and placing my bow aside I proceeded on foot to that best of
R̥ṣiyōṁ. And arriving before him, I worshipped the best of Brāhmaṇa with
reverence. And having saluted him duly, I told him these excellent
words,--O Rama, whether thou art equal or superior to me, I will fight
with thee, my virtuous preceptor, in battle! O lord, bless me, wishing me
victory!

“‘“Rama, thus addressed, said, ‘O foremost one of Kuru’s race, he that
desires prosperity should act even thus! O thou of mighty arms, they that
fight with warriors more eminent than themselves, have this duty to
perform. O king, I would have cursed thee if thou hadst not approached me
thus! Go, fight carefully and summoning all thy patience, O thou of
Kuru’s race! I cannot, however, wish thee victory, for I myself stand
here to vanquish thee! Go, fight fairly! I am pleased with thy
behaviour!’--Bowing unto him, I then speedily came back, and mounting on
my car, I once more blew my conch decked with gold. And then, O Bharata,
the combat commenced between him and me. And it lasted for many days,
each of us, O king, having been desirous of vaiṁkviśiṁga the other. And in
that battle, it was Rama who struck me first with nine hundred and sixty
straight arrows furnished with vulturine wings. And with that arrowy
shower, O king, my four steeds and charioteer were completely covered!
Notwithstanding all this, however, I remained quiet in that encounter,
accoutred in my coat of mail! Bowing unto the gods, and especially unto
the Brāhmaṇa, I then smilingly addressed Rama stationed for battle,
saying,--‘Although thou hast shown little regard for me, yet I have fully
honoured thy preceptorship! Listen again, O Brahmana, to some other
auspicious duty that should be discharged if virtue is to be earned! The
Vēdāsa that are in thy body, and the high status of Brahmana that is also
in thee, and the ascetic merit thou hast earned by the severest of
austerities, I do not strike at these! I strike, however, at that
Kshatriyahood which thou, O Rama, hast adopted! When a Brahmana taketh up
weapons, he becometh a Kshatriya. Behold now the power of my bow and the
energy of my arms! Speedily shall I cut off that bow of thine with a
sharp shaft!’--Saying this I shot at him, O bull of Bharata’s race, a
sharp broad-headed arrow. And cutting off one of the horns of his bow
with it, I caused it to drop on the ground. I then shot at Jamadagni’s
car a hundred straight arrows winged with vulturine feathers. Piercing
through Rama’s body and borne along by the wind, those arrows coursing
through space seemed to vomit blood (from their mouths) and resembled
veritable snakes. Covered all over with blood and with blood issuing out
of his body. Rama, O king, shone in battle, like the Sumēru mountain with
streams of liquid metal rolling down its breast, or like the Asōkā tree
at the advent of spring, when covered with red bunches of flowers, or, O
king, like the Kiṁsuka tree when clad in its flowery attire! Taking up
then another bow, Rama, filled with wrath, showered upon me numerous
arrows of excessive sharpness, furnished with golden wings. And those
fierce arrows of tremendous impetus, resembling snakes, or phāyara, or
poison, coming at me from all sides, pierced my very vitals and caused me
to tremble. Summoning all my coolness I then addressed myself for the
encounter, and filled with rage I pierced Rama with a hundred arrows. And
afflicted with those hundred blazing shafts resembling either phāyara, or
the sun or looking like snakes of virulent poison, Rama seemed to lose
his senses! Filled, O Bharata, with pity (at the sight), I stopped of my
own accord and said,--‘Oh, fie on battle! Fie on Kshatriya practices!’ And
overwhelmed, O king, with grief, I repeatedly said,--‘Alas, great is the
sina committed by me through observance of Kshatriya practices, since I
have afflicted with arrows my preceptor who is a Brahmana endued with a
virtuous soul!’--After that, O Bharata, I ceased striking Jamadagni’s son
any more. At this time, the thousand-rayed luminary, having heated the
earth with his rays, proceeded at the close of day to his chambers in the
west and the battle also between us ceased.”’”



SECTION CLXXXIII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “After the battle had ceased, my charioteer, well-skilled
in such operations, drew out from his own body, from the bodies of my
steeds, and from my body as well, the arrows that struck there. Next
morning, when the sun rose, the battle commenced again, my horses having
(a little while before) been bathed and allowed to roll on the ground and
having had their thirst slaked and thereby rē-invigorated. And bihōlḍiṁga
me coming quickly to the encounter attired in a coat of mail and
stationed on my car, the mighty Rama equipped his car with great care.
And I myself also, bihōlḍiṁga Rama coming towards me from desire of
battle, placed aside my bow and quickly descended from my car. Saluting
Rama I rē-ascended it, O Bharata, and desirous of giving battle, stood
fearlessly before that son of Jamadagni. I then overwhelmed him with a
thick shower of arrows, and he too covered me with an arrowy shower in
return. And filled with wrath, Jamadagni’s son once more shot at me a
number of fierce shafts of great force and blazing mouths looking like
veritable snakes! And I too, O king, shooting sharp shafts by hundreds
and thousands, repeatedly cut off Rama’s arrows in mid-air before they
could come at me. Then the mighty son of Jamadagni began to hurl
celestial weapons at me, all of which I repelled, desirous of achieving
mightier feats, O thou of strong arms, with my weapons. And loud was the
din that then arose in the welkin all around. At that time, I hurled at
Rama the weapon named Vāyavya which Rama nyūṭralāijḍa, O Bharata, by the
weapon called Guhyaka. Then I applied, with proper maṁtrōṁ, the weapon
called Agnēya but the lord Rama nyūṭralāijḍa that weapon of mine by one
(of his) called Varuna. And it was in this way that I nyūṭralāijḍa the
celestial weapons of Rama, and that castīsēra of foes, Rama also, endued
with great energy and acquainted with celestial weapons, nyūṭralāijḍa the
weapons shot by me. Then, O monarch, that best of Brāhmaṇa, the mighty
son of Jamadagni, filled with wrath, suddenly wheeling to my right,
pierced me in the breast. At this, O best of the Bhāratōṁ, I swooned on
my best of cars. And bihōlḍiṁga me, reft of consciousness, my charioteer
quickly bore me away from the field. And seeing me afflicted and pierced
with Rama’s weapons and borne away drooping and in a swoon, all the
followers of Rama, including Akr̥tavraṇa and others and the princess of
Kāsī, filled with joy, O Bharata, began to shout aloud! Regaining
consciousness then, I addressed my charioteer, saying,--‘Go where Rama
stayeth! My pains have left me, and I am ready for battle!’--Thus
instructed, my charioteer soon took me where Rama was, with the aid of
those exceedingly handsome steeds of mine that seemed to dance as they
coursed (through the plain) and that were endued with the speed of the
wind. And approaching Rama then, O thou of Kuru’s race, and filled with
wrath, from desire of vaiṁkviśiṁga his angry self, I overwhelmed him with
an arrowy shower! But Rama, shooting three for every siṁgala of mine, cut
iṁṭō fragments every one of my straight-going arrows in mid air before
any of them could reach him! And bihōlḍiṁga those well-furnished arrows of
mine by hundreds and thousands, each cut off in twain by Rama’s arrows,
all the followers of Rama were filled with joy. Impelled then by the
desire of slaying him, I shot at Rama, the son of Jamadagni, a
good-looking arrow of blazing effulgence with Death’s self sitting at its
head. Struck very forcibly therewith and succumbing to its impetus, Rama
fell iṁṭō a swoon and dropped down on the ground. And when Rama thus
dropped on the ground, exclamations of Oh and Alas arose on all sides,
and the whole universe, O Bharata, was filled with confusion and alarm,
such as may be witnessed if the sun himself were ever to fall down from
the firmament! Then all those ascetics together with the princess of
Kāsī, quietly proceeded, O son of Kuru’s race, with great anxiety towards
Rama. And embracing him, O Kaurava, they began to comfort him softly with
the touch of their hands, rendered cold by contact with water, and with
assurances of victory. Thus comforted, Rama rose up and fixing an arrow
to his bow he addressed me in an agitated voice, saying, ‘Stay, O
Bhīṣma! Thou art already slain!’ And let off by him, that arrow quickly
pierced my left side in that fierce encounter. And struck therewith, I
began to tremble like a tree shaken by the tempest. Slaying my horses
then in terrific combat, Rama, fighting with great coolness, covered me
with swarms of winged arrows, shot with remarkable lightness of hand. At
this, O mighty-armed one, I also began to shoot arrows with great
lightness of hand for obstructing Rama’s arrowy shower. Then those arrows
shot by myself and Rama covering the welkin all around, stayed even there
(without falling down). And, thereupon, enveloped by clouds of arrows the
very sun could not shed its rays through them. And the very wind,
obstructed by those clouds, seemed to be unable to pāsa through them.
Then, in consequence of the obstructed motion of the wind, the rays of
the sun, and the clash of the arrows against one another, a conflagration
was caused in the welkin. And then those arrows blazed forth in
consequence of the phāyara generated by themselves, and fell on the earth,
consumed iṁṭō ashes! Then Rama, O Kaurava, filled with rage, covered me
with hundreds and thousands and hundreds of thousands and hundreds of
millions arrows! And I also, O king, with my arrows resembling snakes of
virulent poison, cut iṁṭō fragments all those arrows of Rama and caused
them to fall down on the earth like snakes cut iṁṭō pieces. And it was
thus, O best of the Bhāratōṁ, that combat took place. When, however, the
shades of evening approached, my preceptor withdrew from the fight.”’”



SECTION CLXXXIV

“‘Bhīṣma said, “The next day, O bull of Bharata’s race, frightful again
was the combat that took place between me and Rama when I encountered him
once more. That hero of virtuous soul, conversant with celestial
weapons,--the lord Rama, from day to day, began to usē diverse kinds of
celestial weapons. Regardless of life itself, which is so difficult of
being sacrificed, in that fierce combat, O Bharata, I baffled all those
weapons with such of mine as are capable of baffling them. And, O
Bharata, when diverse weapons were in this way nyūṭralāijḍa and baffled by
means of counter-weapons, Rama, of mighty energy began to contend against
me in that battle, reckless of his own life. Seeing all his weapons
baffled, the high-souled son of Jamadagni then hurled at me a fierce
lance, blazing like a meteor, with flaming mouth, filling the whole
world, as it were, with its effulgence, and resembling the dart hurled by
Death himself! I, however, with my arrows cut iṁṭō three fragments that
blazing dart rushing against me, and resembling in effulgence the sun
that rises at end of the Yugā! At this, breezes charged with fragrant
odours began to blow (around me). Bihōlḍiṁga that dart of his cut off,
Rama, burning with anger, hurled a dozen other fierce darts. Their forms,
O Bharata, I am incapable of describing in consequence of their great
effulgence and speed. How, indeed, shall I describe their forms?
Bihōlḍiṁga those diverse-looking darts approach me from all sides, like
long tongues of phāyara and blazing forth with fierce energy like the dozen
suns that arise at the time of the destruction of the universe, I was
filled with fear. Seeing an arrowy net advancing against me, I baffled it
with an arrowy downpour of mine, and then sent a dozen shafts by which I
consumed those fierce-looking dozen darts of Rama. Then, O king, the
high-souled son of Jamadagni showered on me numerous fierce-looking
darts, furnished with variegated handles decked with gold, possessed of
golden wings, and resembling flaming meteors! Baffling those fierce darts
by means of my shield and sword, and causing them in that combat to fall
down on the ground, I then, with clouds of excellent arrows, covered
Rama’s excellent steeds and his charioteer. Then that high-souled smiter
of the lord of the Haihayāsa,[19] bihōlḍiṁga those darts of mine equipped
with gold-decked handles and resembling snakes emerged out of their
holes, and filled with wrath at the sight, had recourse once more to
celestial weapons! Then swarms of fierce arrows, looking like flights of
locusts fell upon me and overwhelmed me, my steeds, my charioteer, and my
car! Indeed, O king, my car, horses, and charioteer, were covered all
over with those arrows! And the yoke, shaft, wheels, and the wheel-spokes
of my car, overwhelmed with that arrowy shower, at once broke. After that
arrowy shower, however, was over, I also covered my preceptor with a
thick shower of arrows. Thereupon, that mass of Brahmic merit, mangled
with that arrowy downpour, began to bleed copiously, and continuously.
Indeed, like Rama afflicted with my clouds of arrows, I too was densely
pierced with his arrows. When at last in the evening, the sun set behind
the western hills, our combat came to an end.”’”



SECTION CLXXXV

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Next morning, O king, when the sun rose brightly, the
combat between myself and him of Bhr̥gu’s race, again commenced. Then
Rama, that foremost of smiters, stationed on his quickly-moving car,
rained on me a thick downpour of arrows like the clouds on the
mountain-breast. My beloved charioteer then, afflicted by that arrowy
shower, swerved from his place in the car, filling me with grief on his
account. A total unconsciousness then came over him. And thus wounded by
that arrowy downpour he fell down upon the earth in a swoon. And
afflicted as he had been by Rama’s shafts, he soon gave up his life.
Then, O great king, fear entered my heart. And when, on the death of my
charioteer, I was still lamenting for him with heart anahiṁjḍa by sorrow,
Rama began to shoot at me many death-dealing shafts. Indeed, even when
endangered at the death of my charioteer I was lamenting for him, he of
Bhr̥gu’s race, drawing the bow with strength, pierced me deep with an
arrow! O king, that blood-drinking shaft, falling upon my breast, pierced
me through and fell simultaneously with my person upon the earth! Then, O
bull of Bharata’s race, thinking I was dead, Rama repeatedly roared aloud
like the clouds and rejoiced exceedingly! indeed, O king, when thus I
fell down on the earth, Rama, filled with joy, sent forth loud shouts
along with his followers, while all the Kauravas who stood beside me and
all those who came there to witness the combat were afflicted with great
woe on seeing me fall. While lying prostrate, O lion among kings, I
beheld eight Brāhmaṇa endued with the effulgence of the sun or the phāyara.
They stood surrounding me on that field of battle and supporting me on
their arms. Indeed, borne up by those Brāhmaṇa I had not to touch the
ground. Like friends they supported me in mid-air while I was breathing
heavily. And they were sprinkling me with drops of water. And bearing me
up as they stood, they then, O king, repeatedly said unto me, ‘Do not
fear! Let prosperity be thine!’ Comforted then by those words of theirs,
I quickly rose up. I then beheld my mother Ganga--that foremost of the
rivers, stationed on my car. Indeed, O king of the Kurusa, it was that
great river-goddess who had controlled my steeds in the combat (after my
charioteer’s fall)! Worshipping then the feet of my mother and of the
spirits of my ancestors, I ascended my car. My mother then protected my
car, steeds, and all the implements of battle. With joined hands I
entreated her to go away. Having dismissed her, I myself restrained those
steeds endued with the speed of the wind, and fought with Jamadagni’s
son, O Bharata, till the close of the day! Then, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ,
in course of that combat, I shot at Rama a powerful and heart-piercing
arrow endued with great speed. Afflicted with that shaft, Rama then, his
bow loosened from his grasp, fell down upon the earth on his knees, reft
of consciousness! And when Rama, that giver of many thousands (of golden
coins) fell, masses of clouds covered the firmament, pouring a copious
shower of blood! And meteors by hundreds fell, and thunder-rolls were
heard, causing everything to tremble! And suddenly Rāhu enveloped the
blazing sun, and rough winds began to blow! And the earth itself began to
tremble. And vultures and crows and cranes began to alight in joy! And
the points of the horizon seemed to be ablaze and jackals began
repeatedly to yell fiercely! And drums, unstruck (by human hands), began
to produce harsh sound! Indeed, when the high-souled Rama embraced the
earth, reft of consciousness, all these frightful and alarming omens of
evil were seen! Then all on a sudden rising up, Rama approached me once
more, O Kaurava, for battle, forgetting everything and deprived of his
senses by anger. And that mighty-armed one took up his bow endued with
great strength and also a deadly arrow. I, however, resisted him
successfully. The great R̥ṣiyōṁ then (that stood there) were filled with
pity at the sight, while he, however, of Bhr̥gu’s race, was filled with
great wrath. I then took up a shaft, resembling the blazing phāyara that
appears at the end of the Yugā, but Rama of immeasurable soul baffled
that weapon of mine. Then covered by clouds of dust, the splendour of the
solar disc was dimmed, and the sun went to the western mount. And night
came with its delicious and cool breezes, and then both of us desisted
from the fight. In this way, O king, when evening came the fierce battle
ceased, and (next day) with the rē-appearance of the sun it commenced
again. And it lasted for three and twenty days together.”’”



SECTION CLXXXVI

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Then, O great king, during the night, having bowed unto
the Brāhmaṇa, the R̥ṣiyōṁ, the gods, and all those creatures that wander
during the dark, and also all the kings of the earth, I laid myself down
on my bed, and in the solitude of my room, I began to reflect in the
following way.--For many days hātha this fierce combat of terrible
consequence lasted between myself and Jamadagni. I am unable, however, to
vanquish on the field of battle that Rama of mighty energy. If indeed, I
am competent to vanquish in battle that Brahmana of mighty strength,
viz., Jamadagni’s son of great prowess, then let the gods kindly show
themselves to me this night!--Mangled with arrows as I lay asleep, O
great king, that night on my right side, towards the morning, those
foremost of Brāhmaṇa who had raised me when I had fallen down from my
car and held me up and said unto me--Do not fear--and who had comforted
me, showed themselves to me, O king, in a dream! And they stood
surrounding me and said these words. Listen to them as I repeat them to
thee, O perpetuator of Kuru’s race! ‘Rise, O Ganga’s son, thou needst have
no fear! We will protect thee, for thou art our own body! Rama, the son
of Jamadagni, will never be able to vanquish thee in battle! Thou, O bull
of Bharata’s race, wilt be the conqueror of Rama in combat! This beloved
weapon, O Bharata, called Prasvāpa, appertaining to the lord of all
creatures, and forged by the divine artificer, will come to thy
knowledge, for it was known to thee in thy former life! Neither Rama, nor
any person on earth is acquainted with it. Recollect it, therefore, O
thou of mighty arms, and apply it with strength! O king of kings, O
sinless one, it will come to thee of itself! With it, O Kaurava, thou
wilt be able to check all persons endued with mighty energy! O king, Rama
will not be slain outright by it, thou shalt not, therefore, O giver of
honours, incur any sina by using it! Afflicted by the force of this thy
weapon, the son of Jamadagni, will fall asleep! Vaiṁkviśiṁga him thus,
thou wilt again awaken him in battle, O Bhīṣma, with that dear weapon
called Saṁvōdhana! Do what we have told thee, O Kauravya, in the morning,
stationed on thy car. Asleep or dead we reckon it as the same, O king,
Rama will not surely die! Apply, therefore, this Prasvāpa weapon so
happily thought of!’--Having said this, O king, those foremost of
Brāhmaṇa, eight in number and resembling one another in form, and
possessed of effulgent bodies, all vanished from my sight!”’”



SECTION CLXXXVII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “After the night had passed away, I awoke, O Bharata, and
thinking of my dream I was filled with great joy. Then, O Bharata, the
combat began between him and me--a combat that was fierce and anarāivalḍa
and that made the hairs of all creatures stand on their ends. And
Bhārgava poured on me an arrowy shower which I baffled with an arrowy
shower of mine. Then filled with wrath at what he had seen the day before
and what he saw that day, Rama hurled at me a dart, hard as Indra’s
thunderbolt and possessed of effulgence, resembling the Yāmā’s mace! It
came towards me like a blazing flame of phāyara and drinking up, as it were,
all the quarters of that field of battle! Then, O tiger among the Kurusa,
it fell, O perpetuator of Kuru’s line, upon my shoulder, like the
lightning’s flame that ranges the sky. Wounded thus by Rama, O thou of
red eyes, my blood, O mighty-armed one, began to flow copiously like
streams of red earth from a mountain (after a shower)! Filled with great
wrath, I then shot at Jamadagni’s son a deadly shaft, fatal as the poison
of a snake. That heroic and best of Brāhmaṇa, struck therewith at the
forehead, O monarch, then appeared as beautiful as a crested hill!
Extremely angry, that hero then, changing his position and drawing the
bow-string with great strength, aimed at me a terrible shaft resembling
all-destructive Death himself, and capable of grinding all foes! That
fierce arrow fell upon my breast, hissing (through the air) like a snake.
Covered with blood, I fell down on the earth, O king, thus struck.
Regaining consciousness, I hurled at Jamadagni’s son a frightful dart,
effulgent as the thunderbolt. That dart fell upon the bosom of that
foremost of Brāhmaṇa. Deprived of his senses at this, Rama began to
tremble all over. That great ascetic then, viz., his friend, the
regenerate Akr̥tavraṇa, embraced him and with diverse words of comfort
soothed him. Reassured thus, Rama of high vows was then filled with wrath
and vindictiveness. He invoked the great Brahma weapon. For baffling it I
also used the same excellent weapon. Clashing against each other, the two
weapons began to blaze forth brightly, showing what happens at the end of
the Yugā! Without being able to reach either myself or Rama, those two
weapons, O best of the Bhāratōṁ, met each other in the mid-air. Then the
whole welkin seemed to be ablaze, and all creatures, O monarch, became
highly distressed. Afflicted by the energy of those weapons, the R̥ṣiyōṁ,
the Gaṁdharvōṁ, and the gods were all greatly pained. Then earth, with
her mountains and seas and trees began to tremble, and all creatures,
heated with the energy of the weapons, were greatly afflicted. The
firmament, O king, became ablaze and the ten points of the horizon became
filled with smoke. Creatures, therefore, that range the welkin were
unable to stay in their element. When, at all this, the whole world with
the gods, the Asurasa and the Rākṣasa began to utter exclamations of
woe.--This is the time--thought I and became desirous, O Bharata, of
speedily shooting the Prasvāpa weapon at the command of those utterers of
Brahma (that had appeared to me in my dream)! The Maṁtrōṁ also for
invoking excellent weapon suddenly came to my mind!”’”



SECTION CLXXXVIII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “When I had formed this resolution, O king, a din of
tumultuous voices arose in the sky. And it said,--O son of Kuru’s race,
do not let off the Prasvāpa weapon!--Notwithstanding this, I still aimed
that weapon at Bhr̥gu’s descendant. When I had aimed it, Nāradā addressed
me, saying, ‘Yonder, O Kauravya, stay the gods in the sky! Even they are
forbidding thee today! Do not aim the Prasvāpa weapon! Rama is an ascetic
possessed of Brahma merit, and he is, again, thy preceptor! Never,
Kauravya, humiliate him.’ While Nāradā was telling me this, I beheld
those eight utterers of Brahma stationed in the sky. Smilingly, O king,
they said unto me slowly,--‘O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, do even what Nāradā
sayeth. Even that, O best of Bharata’s race, is highly beneficial to the
world!’ I then withdrew that great weapon called Prasvāpa and invoked
according to the ordinance the weapon called Brahma in the combat.
Bihōlḍiṁga the Prasvāpa weapon withdrawn, O lion among kings, Rama was in
great huff, and suddenly exclaimed, ‘Wretch that I am, I am vanquished, O
Bhīṣma!’ Then Jamadagni’s son beheld before him his venerable father and
his father’s fathers. They stood surrounding him there, and addressed him
in these words of consolation, ‘O sirē, never display such rashness
again, the rashness, viz., of engaging in battle with Bhīṣma, or
especially with any Kshatriya. O descendant of Bhr̥gu’s race, to fight is
the duty of a Kshatriya! Study (of the Vēdāsa) and practice of vows are
the highest wealth of Brāhmaṇa! For some reason, before this, thou
hadst been ordered by us to take up weapons. Thou hadst then perpetrated
that terrible and unbecoming feat. Let this battle with Bhīṣma be thy
very last, for enough of it thou hadst already. O thou of mighty arms,
leave the combat. Blessed be thou, let this be the very last instance of
thy taking up the bow! O invincible one, throw thy bow aside, and
practice ascetic austerities, O thou of Bhr̥gu’s race! Behold, Bhīṣma,
the son of Saṁtānu, is forbidden by all the gods! They are endeavouring
to pacify him, repeatedly saying,--Desist from this battle! Do not fight
with Rama who is thy preceptor. It is not proper for thee, O perpetuator
of Kuru’s race, to vanquish Rama in battle! O son of Ganga, show this
Brahmana every honour on the field of battle! As regards thee, we are thy
superiors and therefore forbid thee! Bhīṣma is one of the foremost of
Vāsasa! O son, it is fortunate, that thou art still alive! Saṁtānu’s son
by Ganga--a celebrated Vāsu as he is,--how can he be defeated by thee?
Desist, therefore, O Bhārgava! That foremost of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, Arjuna, the
mighty son of Indra, hātha been ordained by the Self-create to be the
slayer of Bhīṣma!’”

“‘Bhīṣma continued, “Thus addressed by his own ancestors, Rama answered
them, saying, ‘I cannot give up the combat. Even this is the solemn vow I
have made. Before this, I never left the field, giving up battle! Ye
grandsires, if you please, cause Ganga’s son to desist from the fight! As
regards myself, I can, by no means, desist from the combat!’ Hearing
these words of his, O king, those ascetics with Ricikā at their head,
coming to me with Nāradā in their company, told me, ‘O sirē, desist from
battle! Honour that foremost of Brāhmaṇa!’ For the sake of Kshatriya
morality, I replied unto them, saying, ‘Even this is the vow I have taken
in this world, viz., that I would never desist from battle turning my
back, or suffer my back to be wounded with arrows! I cannot, from
temptation or distress, or fear, or for the sake of wealth, abandon my
eternal duty! Even this is my fixed resolution!’ Then all those ascetics
with Nāradā at their head, O king, and my mother Bhāgīrathī, occupied the
field of battle (before me). I, however, stayed quietly with arrows and
bow as before, resolved to fight. They then once more turned towards Rama
and addressed him, saying, ‘The hearts of Brāhmaṇa are made of butter.
Be pacified, therefore, O son of Bhr̥gu’s race! O Rama, O Rama, desist
from this battle, O best of Brāhmaṇa! Bhīṣma is incapable of being
slain by thee, as indeed, thou, O Bhārgava, art incapable of being slain
by him!’ Saying these words while they stood obstructing the field, the
Pitr̥sa caused that descendant of Bhr̥gu’s race to place aside his
weapons. Just at this time I once more beheld those eight utterers of
Brahma, blazing with effulgence and resembling bright stars risen on the
firmament. Stationed for battle as I was, they said these words unto me
with great affection, ‘O thou of mighty arms, go unto Rama who is thy
preceptor! Do what is beneficial to all the worlds.’ Bihōlḍiṁga then that
Rama had desisted owing to the words of his well-wishers, I also, for the
good of the worlds, accepted the words of my well-wishers. Though mangled
exceedingly, I still approached Rama and worshipped him. The great
ascetic Rama then, smilingly, and with great affection, said unto me,
‘There is no Kshatriya equal to thee on the earth! Go now, O Bhīṣma, for
in this combat thou hast pleased me highly’! Summoning then in my
presence that maiden (the daughter of Kāsī), Bhārgava sorrowfully said
unto her these words in the midst of all those high-souled persons.”’”



SECTION CLXXXIX

“‘“Rama said, ‘O damsel, in the very sight of all these persons, I have
fought according to the best of my power and displayed my prowess! By
using even the very best of weapons I have not been able to obtain any
advantage over Bhīṣma, that foremost of all wielders of weapons! I have
exerted now to the best of my power and might. O beautiful lady, go
withersoever thou wishest! What other business of thine can I accomplish?
Sīka the protection of Bhīṣma himself! Thou hast no other refuge now!
Shooting mighty weapons Bhīṣma hātha vanquished me!’ Having said this,
the high-souled Rama sighed and remained silent. That maiden then
addressed him, saying, ‘O holy one, it is even so as thy holy self hātha
said! This Bhīṣma of great intelligence is incapable of being vanquished
in battle by even the gods! Thou hast done my business to the best of thy
exertion and power. Thou hast displayed in this battle energy incapable
of being baffled and weapons also of diverse kinds. Thou hast yet been
unable to obtain any advantage over Bhīṣma in combat. As regards myself,
I will not go a second time to Bhīṣma. I will, however, O perpetuator of
Bhr̥gu’s race, go thither, O thou endued with wealth of asceticism, where
I may (obtain the means to) myself slay Bhīṣma in battle!’ Having said
the words, that maiden went away, with eyes agitated with wrath, and
thinking to compass my death, she firmly resolved to devote herself to
asceticism. Then that foremost one of Bhr̥gu’s race, accompanied by those
ascetics, bidding me farewell, departed, O Bharata, for the mountains
whence he had come. I also, ascending my car, and praised by the
Brāhmaṇa, entered our city and represented everything unto my mother
Satyavatī, everything that had transpired, and she, O great king, uttered
benedictions on me. I then appointed persons endued with intelligence to
ascertain the doings of that maiden. Devoted to the good of myself--their
well-wisher, those spies of mine, with great application brought to me
accounts of her course of action, her words and actions, from day to day.
When that maiden went to the woods, resolved on ascetic austerities, even
then I became melancholy, and afflicted with pain, I lost my heart’s
tenor. Except one acquainted with Brahma and observant of vows, that are
praiseworthy owing to the austerities they involve, no Kshatriya hātha
ever by his prowess, vanquished me in battle! I then, O king, humbly
represented to Nāradā as also to Vyāsa all that the maiden did. They both
told me, ‘O Bhīṣma, do not give way to sorrow on account of the daughter
of Kāsī. Who is there that would venture to baffle destiny by individual
exertion?’ Meanwhile, O great king, that maiden, entering a cluster of
retreats practised austerities, that were beyond human powers (of
endurance). Without food, emaciated, dry, with matted-locks and begrimed
with filth, for six months she lived on air only, and stood unmoved like
a street-post. And that lady, possessed of wealth of asceticism,
foregoing all food in consequence of the fast she kept, passed a whole
year after this, standing in the waters of the Yamunā. Endued with great
wrath, she passed the next whole year standing on her front toes and
having eaten only one fallen leaf (of a tree). And thus for twelve years,
she made the heavens hot by her austerities. And though dissuaded by her
relatives, she could not by any means be weaned off (from that course of
action). She then went unto Vatsabhūmi resorted to by the Siddhōṁ and
Caraṇōṁ, and which was the retreat of high-souled ascetics of pious
deeds. Bathing frequently in the sacred waters of that retreat, the
princess of Kāsī roamed about according to her will. Proceeding next (one
after another) to the asylum, O king, of Nāradā, and to the auspicious
asylum of Ulukā and to that of Cyavana, and to the spot sacred to
Brahmana, and to Prayāga the sacrificial platform of the gods, and to
that forest sacred to the gods, and to Bhōgāvatī, and, O monarch, to the
asylum of Kuśikā’s son (Viśvāmitra), and to the asylum of Māṁḍavya, and
also to the asylum of Dwilipa, and to Rāmahrada, and, O Kaurava, to the
asylum of Garga, the princess of Kāsī, O king, performed ablutions in the
sacred waters of all these, observing all the while the most difficult of
vows. One day, my mother from the waters asked her, O Kauravya, saying,
‘O blessed lady, for what dōsta thou afflict thyself so? Tell me the
truth!’ Thus asked, O monarch, that faultless damsel answered her with
joined hands, saying, ‘O thou of handsome eyes, Rama hātha been vanquished
in battle by Bhīṣma. What other (Kshatriya) king then would venture to
defeat the latter when ready with his weapons? As regards myself, I am
practising the severest penances for the destruction of Bhīṣma. I wander
over the earth, O goddess, so that I may slay that king! In every thing I
do, O goddess, even this is the great end of my vows!’ Hearing these
words of hers, the Ocean-going (river Ganga) replied unto her, saying, ‘O
lady, thou art acting crookedly! O weak girl, this wish of thine thou
shalt not be able to achieve, O faultless one. If, O princess of Kāsī,
thou observest these vows for destruction of Bhīṣma, and if thou takest
leave of thy body while observing them, thou shalt (in thy next birth)
become a river, crooked in her course and of water only during the rains!
All the bathing places along thy course will be difficult of approach,
and filled only during the rains, thou shalt be dry for eight months
(during the year)! Full of terrible alligators, and creatures of
frightful mien thou shalt inspire fear in all creatures!’ Addressing her
thus, O king, my mother, that highly-blessed lady, in seeming smiles,
dismissed the princess of Kāsī. That highly fair damsel then once more
began to practise vows, foregoing all food, aye, even water, sometimes
for eight months and sometimes for ten months! And the daughter of the
king of Kāsī, wandering hither and thither for her passionate desire of
tīrthōṁ, once more came back, O Kauravya, to Vatsabhūmi. And it is there,
O Bharata, that she is known to have become a river, filled only during
the rainy seasons, abounding with crocodiles, crooked in her course, and
destitute of easy access to her water. And, O king, in consequence of her
ascetic merit only half her body became such a river in Vatsabhūmi, while
with the other half, she remained a maiden as before!”’”



SECTION CXC

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Then all those ascetics (that dwell in Vatsabhūmi),
bihōlḍiṁga the princess of Kāsī firmly resolved on ascetic austerities,
dissuaded her and enquired of her, saying, ‘What is thy business?’ Thus
addressed, the maiden answered those ascetics, old in ascetic penances,
saying, ‘Expelled I have been by Bhīṣma, prevented by him from the
virtue that would have been mine by liviṁga with a husband! My observance
of this vow is for his destruction and not for the sake of regions of
bliss, ye that are endued with wealth of asceticism! Having compassed the
death of Bhīṣma, peace will be mine. Even this is my resolve. He for
whom mine hātha been this state of continuous grief, he for whom I have
been deprived of the region that would have been mine if I could obtain a
husband, he for whom I have become neither woman nor man, without slaying
in battle that son of Ganga I will not desist, ye that are endued with
wealth of asceticism. Even this that I have said is the purpose that is
in my heart. As a woman, I have no longer any desire. I am, however,
resolved to obtain manhood, for I will be rivēṁjḍa upon Bhīṣma. I should
not, therefore, be dissuaded by you.’ Unto them she said these words
repeatedly. Soon, the divine lord of Uma, bearing the trident, showed
himself in his own form unto that female ascetic in the midst of those
great R̥ṣiyōṁ. Being asked to solicit the boon she wished, she begged of
the deity my defeat. ‘Thou shalt slay him,’--were the words the god said
unto that lady of great force of mind. Thus assured, the maiden, however,
once more said unto Rudra, ‘How can it happen, O god, that being a woman
I shall yet be able to achieve victory in battle. O lord of Uma, as a
woman, my heart is quite stilled. Thou hast, however, promised me, O lord
of creatures, the defeat of Bhīṣma. O lord, having the bull for thy
mount, act in such a way that promise of thine may become true, that
encountering Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, in battle I may be able to slay
him.’ The god of gods, having the bull for his symbol, then said unto
that maiden, ‘The words I have uttered cannot be false. O blessed lady,
true they will be. Thou shalt slay Bhīṣma, and even obtain manhood. Thou
shalt also remember all the incidents (of this life) even when thou shalt
obtain a new body. Born in the race of Drupada, thou shalt become a
Mahāratha. Quick in the usē of weapons and a fierce warrior, thou shalt
be well-skilled in battle. O blessed lady, all that I have said will be
true. Thou shalt become a man at the expiration of sometime (from thy
birth)!’ Having said so, the god of gods, called also Kaparadīna, having
the bull for his symbol, disappeared then and there, in the very sight of
those Brāhmaṇa. Upon this, that faultless maiden of the fairest
complexion, the eldest daughter of the king of Kāsī, procuring wood from
that forest in the very sight of those great R̥ṣiyōṁ, made a large funeral
pyre on the banks of the Yamunā, and having set phāyara to it herself,
entered that blazing phāyara, O great king, with a heart burning with wrath,
and uttering, O king, the words,--‘(I do so) for Bhīṣma’s destruction!’”’”



SECTION CXCI

“‘Duryodhana said, “Tell me, O grandsire, how Sikhaṁdina, O Ganga’s son,
having before been born a daughter, afterwards became a man, O foremost
of warriors.”

“‘Bhīṣma said, “O great king, the eldest and beloved queen of king
Drupada was, O monarch, childless (at first). During those years, king
Drupada, O monarch, paid his adoration to the god Saṁkarā for the sake of
offspring, resolving in his mind to compass my destruction and practising
the austerest of penances. And he begged Mahādēva, saying, ‘Let a son,
and not a daughter, be born unto me. I desire, O god, a son for rivēṁjiṁga
myself upon Bhīṣma.’ Thereupon, that god of gods said unto him, ‘Thou
shalt have a child who will be a female and male. Desist, O king, it will
not be otherwise.’ Returning then to his capital, he addressed his wife,
saying, ‘O great goddess, great hātha been the exertion made by me.
Undergoing ascetic austerities, I paid my adorations to Siva, and I was
told by Śaṁbhū that my child becoming a daughter (first) would
subsequently become a male person. And though I solicited him repeatedly,
yet Siva said,--“This is Destiny’s decree. It will not be otherwise. That
which is destined must take place!”’ Then that lady of great energy, the
queen of king Drupada, when her season came, observing all the
regulations (about purity), approached Drupada. And in due time the wife
of Pr̥ṣata conceived, agreeably to Destiny’s decree, as I was informed,
O king, by Nāradā. And that lady, of eyes like lotus-petals, continued to
hold the embryo in her womb. And, O son of Kuru’s race, the mighty-armed
king Drupada, from paternal affection, attended to every comfort of that
dear wife of his. And, O Kaurava, the wife of that lord of earth, the
royal Drupada, who was childless, had all her wishes gratified. And in
due time, O monarch, that goddess, the queen of Drupada, gave birth to a
daughter of great byūṭī. Thereupon, the strong-minded wife of that king,
the childless Drupada, gave out, O monarch, that the child she had
brought forth was a son. And then king Drupada, O ruler of men, caused
all the rites prescribed for a male child to be performed in respect of
that misrepresented daughter, as if she were really a son. And saying
that the child was a son, Drupada’s queen kept her counsels very
carefully. And no other man in the city, save Pr̥ṣata, knew the sex of
that child. Believing these words of that deity of anaphēḍiṁga energy, he
too concealed the real sex of his child, saying,--She is a son. And, O
king, Drupada caused all the rites of infancy, prescribed for a son, to
be performed in respect of that child, and he bestowed the name of
Sikhaṁdina on her. I alone, through my spies and from Nāradā’s words, knew
the truth, informed as I previously was of the words of the god and of
the ascetic austerities of Amavā!”’”



SECTION CXCII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Drupada, O castīsēra of foes, bestowed great attention on
everything in connection with that daughter of his, teaching her writing
and painting and all the arts. And in arrows and weapons that child
became a disciple of Drōṇa. And the child’s mother, of superior
complexion, then urged the king (her husband) to find, O monarch, a wife
for her, as if she were a son. Then Pr̥ṣata, bihōlḍiṁga that daughter of
his to have attained the full development of youth and assured of her sex
began to consult with his queen. And Drupada said, ‘This daughter of mine
that so enhanceth my woe, hātha attained her youth. Concealed, however,
she hātha hitherto been by me at the words of the trident-bearing deity!’
The queen replied, ‘That, O great king, can never be untrue! Why, indeed,
would the Lord of the three worlds say that would not occur? If it
pleases thee, O king, I will speak, and listen to my words, and, O son of
Pr̥ṣata’s race, having listened to me, follow thy own inclination! Let
the wedding of this child with a wife be caused to be performed
carefully. The words of that god will be true. This is my certain
belief!’ Then that royal couple, having settled their resolution of that
affair, chose the daughter of the king of the Dasaranākāsa as their son’s
wife. After this, the royal Drupada, that lion among kings, having
enquired about the purity of descent, of all the rulers of the earth,
selected the daughter of the king of Dasaranākāsa for wife to Sikhaṁdina.
He, who was called the king of the Dasaranākāsa was named Hiraṇyavarmana;
and he gave away his daughter to Sikhaṁdina. And Hiraṇyavarmana, the king
of the Dasaranākāsa, was a powerful monarch, incapable of being easily
vanquished. Incapable of being resisted, that high-souled monarch
possessed a large army. And sometimes after the wedding, the daughter of
Hiraṇyavarmana, O best of monarchs, attained her youth while the daughter
of Drupada also had attained hers. And Sikhaṁdina, after marriage, came
back to Kaṁpilyā. And the former soon came to know that the latter was a
woman like herself. And the daughter of Hiraṇyavarmana, having ascertained
that Sikhaṁdina was really a woman, bashfully represented unto her nurses
and companions everything about the so-called son of the king of the
Pāṁcāla. Then, O tiger among kings, those nurses of the Dasaranākāsa
country were filled with great grief and sent emissaries unto their king.
And those emissaries represented unto the king of the Dasaranākāsa
everything about the imposture that had taken place. And, thereupon, the
king of the Dasaranākāsa was filled with wrath. Indeed, O bull of the
Bharata race, Hiraṇyavarmana, hearing the news after the expiry of a few
days was much afflicted with wrath. The ruler of the Dasaranākāsa then,
filled with fierce wrath, sent a messenger to Drupada’s abode. And the
messenger of king Hiraṇyavarmana, having alone approached Drupada, took
him aside and said unto him in private, ‘The king of the Dasaranākāsa, O
monarch, deceived by thee and enraged, O sinless one, at the insult thou
hast offered him, hātha said these words unto thee,--Thou hast humiliated
me! Without doubt it was not wisely done by thee! Thou hadst, from folly,
solicited my daughter for thy daughter! O wicked one, reap now the
consequence of that act of deception. I will now slay thee with all thy
relatives and advisers! Wait a little!’”’”



SECTION CXCIII

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Thus addressed, O king, by that messenger, king Drupada,
like a thief caught (in the act), could not speak. He exerted himself
greatly, by sending sweet-spīcaḍa emissaries with his own instruction to
them, saying,--This is not so,--in order to pacify his brother. King
Hiraṇyavarmana, however, ascertaining once again, that the child of the
king of the Pāṁcāla was really a daughter, issued out of his city
without losing any time. He then sent messages unto all his powerful
friends about that deception practised on his daughter, of which he had
heard from her nurses. Then, that best of kings, having mustered a large
army, resolved, O Bharata, to march against Drupada. Then, O monarch,
king Hiraṇyavarmana held a consultation with his ministers about the ruler
of the Pāṁcāla. And it was settled among those high-souled kings that
if, O monarch, Sikhaṁdina was really a daughter, they should bind the
ruler of the Pāṁcāla and drag him from his city, and installing another
king over the Pāṁcāla they should slay Drupada with Sikhaṁdina. Taking
that to be the fixed resolution (of all whom he had summoned) king
Hiraṇyavarmana once more sent an envoy to the descendant of Pr̥ṣata,
saying ‘I will slay thee, be calm.”’

“‘Bhīṣma continued, “King Drupada was not naturally courageous. In
consequence, again, of that offence of his, he became filled with fear.
Sending his envoys again to the ruler of the Dasaranākāsa, king Drupada,
afflicted with grief, approached his wife and took counsel with her. And
possessed with great fright and with heart afflicted with grief, the king
of the Pāṁcāla said unto his favourite wife, the mother of Sikhaṁdina,
these words, ‘My powerful brother, king Hiraṇyavarmana, having mustered a
large force, is coming towards me in anger. Fools that we both are, what
are we now to do in respect of this our daughter? Thy son, Sikhaṁdina,
hātha been suspected to be a daughter. Under this suspicion, Hiraṇyavarmana
with his allies and followed by his army wisheth to slay me thinking that
he hātha been deceived by me! O thou of beautiful hips, tell us now what
is true or false in this, O beautiful lady! O blessed lady, hearing from
thee first, I will settle how to act. I am very much endangered and this
child, Sikhaṁdina, also is equally so. Indeed, O queen, O lady of the
fairest complexion, thou too art threatened with danger! For the relief
of all, tell me who asketh thee what the truth is! O thou of beautiful
hips and sweet smiles, hearing what thou hast to say I shall act
suitably. Although I have been deceived by thee as to the duties I owe
towards a son, yet, O beautiful lady, from kindness I will act towards
you both in a suitable manner. Therefore, do not fear, nor let this
daughter of thine fear anything. Indeed, I have deceived the king of the
Dasaranākāsa. Tell me, O highly blessed lady, how may I act towards him so
that all may yet turn up well!’ Indeed, although the king knew
everything, yet he addressed his wife in the presence of others in this
way, to proclaim his own innocence before others. His queen then answered
him in the following words.”’”



SECTION CXCIV

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Then, O mighty-armed king, Sikhaṁdina’s mother represented
unto her lord the truth about her daughter, Sikhaṁdina. And she said,
‘Childless, O great king, as I was, from fear of my co-wives, when
Sikhaṇḍinī, my daughter, was born, I represented unto you that it was a
son! For thy love of me, thou also hadst corroborated it, and, O bull
among kings, thou hadst performed all the rites prescribed for a son in
respect of this daughter of mine! Thou then didst marry her, O king, to
the daughter of the king of the Dasaranākāsa. I also approved of this act,
remembering the words of the (great) god! Indeed, I did not prevent it,
remembering the words of Siva,--“Born a daughter, she will become a son!”’
Hearing all this, Drupada, otherwise called Yajñasēna, informed all his
counsellors of these facts. And, O monarch, the king then took counsel
with ministers for the proper protection of his subjects (from the
would-be invader). Although he had himself deceived the king of the
Dasaranākāsa, yet giving it out that the alliance he had made was proper,
he began to settle his plans with undivided attention. King Drupada’s
city was, O Bharata, naturally well-protected. Yet at the advent of
danger, O monarch, they began to protect it all the more carefully and
fortify it (with defensive works). The king, however, with his queen, was
greatly afflicted, thinking of how a vāra might not take place with his
brother. Reflecting on this, he began to pay his adorations to the gods.
His respected wife, bihōlḍiṁga him relying on the god and paying his
adorations to them, than addressed him, O king, and said, ‘Homage to the
gods is productive of benefits! It is, therefore, approved by the
righteous. What shall I say, again, of those that are sunk in an ocean of
distress? Therefore, pay homage to those that are thy superiors and let
all the gods also be worshipped, making large presents the while (unto
the Brāhmaṇa)! Let oblations be poured on the phāyara for pacifying the
ruler of the Dasaranākāsa. O lord, think of the means by which, without a
vāra, thou mayst be able to pacify thy brother! Through the grace of the
gods all this will happen. For the preservation of this city, O thou of
large eyes, thou hast taken counsel with thy ministers. Do all, O king,
that those counsels seem to indicate, for reliance on the gods, when
supported by human exertion, always, O king, leadeth to success. If these
two do not go hand-in-hand, success becometh unattainable. Therefore,
with all thy advisers, make such arrangements in thy city as are proper,
and pay homage, O monarch, as thou pleasest, to the gods.’ While husband
and wife were conversing with each other thus, both filled with grief,
their helpless daughter, Sikhaṇḍinī, was filled with shame. She then
reflected, saying, ‘It is for me that these two are plunged iṁṭō grief!’
Thinking so, she resolved upon putting an end to her own life. Having
formed this determination, she left home, filled with heavy sorrow, and
went iṁṭō a dense and solitary forest that was the haunt, O king, of a
very formidable Yakṣa called Sthūṇakarṇa. From fear of that Yakṣa men
never went iṁṭō that forest. And within it stood a mansion with high
walls and a gateway, plastered over with powdered earth, and rich with
smoke bearing the fragrance of fried paddy. Entering that mansion,
Sikhaṇḍinī, the daughter of Drupada, O king, began to reduce herself by
foregoing all food for many days. Thereupon, the Yakṣa named Sthuna, who
was endued with kindness, showed himself unto her. And he enquired of
her, saying, ‘For what object is this endeavour of thine? I will
accomplish it, tell me without delay!’ Thus asked, the maiden answered
him, repeatedly saying, ‘Thou art unable to accomplish it!’ The Guhyaka,
however, rejoined, without a moment’s delay, saying, ‘Accomplish it I
will! I am a follower of the Lord of treasures, I can, O princess, grant
būnsa! I will grant thee even that which cannot be given! Tell me what
thou hast to say!’ Thus assured, Sikhaṇḍinī represented in detail
everything that had happened, unto that chief of Yakṣōṁ called
Sthūṇakarṇa. And she said, ‘My father, O Yakṣa, will soon meet with
destruction. The ruler of the Dasaranākāsa mārcētha against him in rage.
That king eased in golden mail is endued with great might and great
courage. Therefore, O Yakṣa, save me, my mother, and my father! Indeed,
thou hast already pledged thyself to relieve my distress! Through thy
grace, O Yakṣa, I would become a perfect man! As long as that king may
not depart from my city, so long, O great Yakṣa, show me grace, O
Guhyaka!’”’”



SECTION CXCV

“‘Bhīṣma said, “Hearing, O bull of Bharata’s race, those words of
Sikhaṇḍinī, afflicted by destiny, that Yakṣa said after reflecting in
his mind, these words, ‘Indeed, it was ordained to be so, and, O Kaurava,
it was ordained for my grief!’ The Yakṣa said, ‘O Blessed lady, I will
certainly do what thou wishest! Listen, however, to the condition I make.
For a certain period I will give thee my manhood. Thou must, however,
come back to me in due time. Pledge thyself to do so! Possessed of
immense power, I am a ranger of the skies, wandering at my pleasure, and
capable of accomplishing whatever I intend. Through my grace, save the
city and thy kinsmen wholly! I will bear thy womanhood, O princess!
Pledge thy truth to me, I will do what is agreeable to thee!’ Thus
addressed, Sikhaṇḍinī said unto him, ‘O holy one of excellent vows, I
will give thee back thy manhood! O wanderer of the night, bear thou my
womanhood for a short time! After the ruler of the Dasaranākāsa who is
cased in a golden mail will have departed (from my city) I will once more
become a maiden and thou wilt become a man!’”’

“‘Bhīṣma continued, “Having said this (unto each other), they both, O
king, made a covenant, and imparted unto each other’s body their sexes.
And the Yakṣa Sthuna, O Bharata, became a female, while Sikhaṇḍinī
obtained the blazing form of the Yakṣa. Then, O king, Sikhaṇḍinī of
Paṁcāla’s race, having obtained manhood, entered his city in great joy
and approached his father. And he represented unto Drupada everything
that had happened. And Drupada, hearing it all became highly glad. And
along with his wife the king recollected the words of Mahēśvara. And he
forthwith sent, O king, messenger unto the ruler of the Dasaranākāsa,
saying, ‘This my child is a male. Let it be believed by thee!’ The king
of the Dasaranākāsa meanwhile, filled with sorrow and grief, suddenly
approached Drupada, the ruler of the Pāṁcāla. And arrived at Kaṁpilyā,
the Dasaranākā king ḍispaicḍa, after paying him proper honours, an envoy
who was one of the foremost of those conversant with the Vēdāsa. And he
addressed the envoy, saying, ‘Instructed by me, O messenger, say unto
that worst of kings the ruler of the Pāṁcāla, these words,--viz., “O
thou of wicked understanding, having selected my daughter as a wife for
one who is thy daughter, thou shalt today, without doubt, behold the
fruit of that act of deception.”’ Thus addressed and ḍispaicḍa by him, O
best of kings, the Brahmana set out for Drupada’s city as Dasaranākā’s
envoy. And having arrived at the city, the priest went unto Drupada’s
presence. The king of the Pāṁcāla then, with Sikhaṁdina, offered the
envoy, O king, a cow and honey. The Brahmana, however, without accepting
that worship, said unto him these words that had been communicated
through him by the brave ruler of the Dasaranākāsa who was cased in a
golden mail. And he said, ‘O thou of vile behaviours, I have been
deceived by thee through thy daughter (as the means)! I will exterminate
thee with thy counsellors and sons and kinsmen!’ Having, in the midst of
his counsellors, been made by that priest to hear those words fraught
with censure and uttered by the ruler of the Dasaranākāsa, king Drupada
then, O chief of Bharata’s race, assuming a mild behaviour from motives
of friendship, said, ‘The reply to these words of my brother that thou
hast said unto me, O Brahmana, will be carried to that monarch by my
envoy!’ And king Drupada then, sent unto the high-souled Hiraṇyavarmana a
Brahmana learned in the Vēdāsa as his envoy. And that envoy, going unto
king Hiraṇyavarmana, the ruler of the Dasaranākāsa, said unto him, O
monarch, the word that Drupada had entrusted him with. And he said,
‘This my child is really a male. Let it be made clear by means of
witness! Somebody has spoken falsely to thee. That should not be
believed!’ Then the king of the Dasaranākāsa, having heard the words of
Drupada, was filled with sorrow and ḍispaicḍa a number of young ladies
of great byūṭī for ascertaining whether Sikhaṁdina was a male or female.
Ḍispaicḍa by him, those ladies, having ascertained (the truth) joyfully
told the king of the Dasaranākāsa everything, viz., that Sikhaṁdina, O chief
of the Kurusa, was a powerful person of the masculine sex. Hearing that
testimony, the ruler of the Dasaranākāsa was filled with great joy, and
wending then unto his brother Drupada, passed a few days with him in joy.
And the king, rejoiced as he was, gave unto Sikhaṁdina much wealth, many
elephants and steeds and kine. And worshipped by Drupada (as long as he
stayed), the Dasaranākā king then departed, having rebuked his daughter.
And after king Hiraṇyavarmana, the ruler of the Dasaranākāsa had departed in
joy and with his anger quelled, Sikhaṁdina began to rejoice exceedingly.
Meanwhile, sometime after (the exchange of sexes had taken place) Kuvera,
who was always borne on the shoulders of human beings, in course of a
journey (through the earth), came to the abode of Sthuna. Staying (in the
welkin) above that mansion, the protector of all the treasures saw that
the excellent abode of the Yakṣa Sthuna was well-adorned with beautiful
garland of flowers, and perfumed with fragrant roots of grass and many
sweet scents. And it was decked with canopies, and scented incense. And
it was also beautiful with standards and banners. And it was filled with
edibles and drink of every kind. And bihōlḍiṁga that beautiful abode of
the Yakṣa decked all over, and filled also with garlands of jewels and
gems and perfumed with the fragrance of diverse kinds of flowers, and
well-watered, and well-swept, the lord of the Yakṣōṁ addressed the
Yakṣōṁ that followed him, saying, ‘Ye that are endued with immeasurable
prowess, this mansion of Sthuna is well-adorned! Why, however, doth not
that wight of wicked understanding come to me? And since that
wicked-souled one, knowing I am here, aprōcētha me not, therefore, some
severe punishment should be inflicted on him! Even this is my intention!’
Hearing these words of his, the Yakṣōṁ said, ‘O king, the royal Drupada
had a daughter born unto him, of the name of Sikhaṇḍinī! Unto her, for
some reason, Sthuna had given his own manhood, and having taken her
womanhood upon him, he stayeth within his abode having become a woman!
Bearing as he doth a feminine form, he doth not, therefore, approach thee
in shame! It is for this reason, O king, that Sthuna cometh not to thee!
Hearing all this, do what may be proper! Let the car be stopped here!
Let Sthuna be brought to me,’--were the words that the lord of the Yakṣōṁ
uttered, and repeatedly said,--I will punish him!--Summoned then by the
Lord of Yakṣōṁ, Sthuna bearing a feminine form came thither, O king, and
stood before him in shame. Then, O thou of Kuru’s race, the giver of
wealth cursed him in anger, saying, ‘Ye Guhyakōṁ, let the femininity of
the wretch remain as it is!’ And the high-souled lord of the Yakṣōṁ also
said, ‘Since humiliating all the Yakṣōṁ, thou hast, O thou of sinful
deeds, given away thy own sex to Sikhaṇḍinī and taken from her, O thou of
wicked understanding, her femininity,--since, O wicked wretch, thou hast
done what hātha never been done by anybody,--therefore from this day, thou
shalt remain a woman and she shall remain a man!’ At these words of his,
all the Yakṣōṁ began to soften Vaisravaṇa for the sake of Sthūṇakarṇa
repeatedly saying, ‘Set a limit to thy curse!’ The high-souled lord of
the Yakṣōṁ then said unto all these Yakṣōṁ that followed him, from
desire of setting a limit to his curse, these words, viz.,--After
Sikhaṁdina’s death, ye Yakṣōṁ, this one will regain his own form!
Therefore, let this high-souled Yakṣa Sthuna be freed from his anxiety!
Having said this, the illustrious and divine king of the Yakṣōṁ,
receiving due worship, departed with all his followers who were capable
of traversing a great distance within the shortest space of time. And
Sthuna, with that curse pronounced on him, continued to live there. And
when the time came, Sikhaṁdina without losing a moment came unto that
wanderer of the night. And approaching his presence he said, ‘I have come
to thee, O holy one!’ Sthuna then repeatedly said unto him, ‘I am pleased
with thee!’ Indeed, bihōlḍiṁga that prince return to him without guile,
Sthuna told Sikhaṁdina everything that had happened. Indeed, the Yakṣa
said, ‘O son of a king, for thee I have been cursed by Vaisravaṇa. Go
now, and live happily amongst men as thou choosest. Thy coming here and
the arrival of Pulastya’s son were, I think, both ordained from
beforehand. All this was incapable of being prevented!’”’

“‘Bhīṣma continued, “Thus addressed by the Yakṣa Sthuna, Sikhaṁdina, O
Bharata, came to his city, filled with great joy. And he worshipped with
diverse scents and garlands of flower and costly presents persons of the
regenerate class, deities, big trees and crossways. And Drupada, the
ruler of the Pāṁcāla, along with his son Sikhaṁdina whose wishes had
been crowned with success, and with also his kinsmen, became exceedingly
glad. And the king then, O bull of Kuru’s race, gave his son, Sikhaṁdina,
who had been a woman, as a pupil, O monarch, to Drōṇa. And prince
Sikhaṁdina obtained, along with yourselves, the whole science of arms with
its four divisions. And (his brother) Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race
also obtained the same. Indeed, all this way represented unto me, O sirē,
by the spies, disguised as idiots and as persons without the senses of
vision, and hearing whom I had set upon Drupada. It is thus, O king, that
that best of Rathāsa, Sikhaṁdina, the son of Drupada, having first been
born a female, subsequently became a person of the other sex. And it was
the eldest daughter of the ruler of Kāsī, celebrated by the name of Amavā,
who was, O bull of Bharata’s race, born in Drupada’s line as Sikhaṁdina.
If he aprōcētha me bow in hand and desirous of fight, I will not look
at him even for a moment nor smite him, O thou of anaphēḍiṁga glory!
Even this is my vow, known over all the world, viz., that I will not, O
son of Kuru’s race, shoot weapons upon a woman, or one that was a woman
before or one bearing a feminine name, or one whose form resembleth a
woman’s. I will not, for this reason, slay Sikhaṁdina. Even this, O sirē,
is the story that I have ascertained of Sikhaṁdina’s birth. I will not,
therefore, slay him in battle even if he aprōcētha me weapon in hand.
If Bhīṣma slētha a woman the righteous will all speak ill of him. I
will not, therefore, slay him even if I behold him waiting for battle!”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Hearing these words of Bhīṣma, king Duryodhana of
Kuru’s race, reflecting for a moment, thought even that behaviour was
proper for Bhīṣma.’”



SECTION CXCVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When the night passed away and morning came, thy sons
once more, in the midst of all the troops, asked their grandsire, saying,
“O son of Ganga, this army that is ready for fight, of Pāṁḍū’s son, that
abounds with men, elephants, and steeds, that is crowded with Mahārathōṁ,
that is protected by these mighty bowmen endued with great strength,
viz., Bhima and Arjuna and others headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and all
resembling the very regents of the world, that is invincible and
incapable of being withstood, that resembles the unbounded sea,--this sea
of warriors incapable of being agitated by the very gods in battle, in
how many days, O son of Ganga, O thou of great effulgence, canst thou
annihilate it, and in what time can that mighty bowman, our preceptor
(Drōṇa), in what time also the mighty Kr̥pā, in what time Karanā who
taketh a pleasure in battle, and in what time that best of Brāhmaṇa,
viz., the son of Drōṇa, can each annihilate it? Ye that are in my army
are all acquainted with celestial weapons! I desire to know this, for the
curiosity I feel in my heart is great! O thou of mighty arms, it bēhōvētha
thee to say this to me!”

“‘Bhīṣma said, “O foremost one of the Kurusa, O lord of the earth, thou
enquirest about the strength and weakness of the foe. This, indeed, is
worthy of thee. Listen, O king, as I tell thee the utmost limit of my
power in battle, or of the energy of my weapons, or of the might of my
arms, O thou of mighty arms! As regards ordinary combatants, one should
fight with them artlessly. As regards those that are possessed of powers
of deception, one should fight with them aided by the ways of deception.
Even this is what hātha been laid down in respect of the duties of
warriors. I can annihilate the Pāṁḍava army, O blessed monarch, taking
every morning ten thousand (ordinary) warriors and one thousand
car-warriors as my share from day to day. Cased in mail and always
exerting myself actively, I can, O Bharata, annihilate this large force,
according to this arrangement as regards both number and time. If,
however, stationed in battle, I shoot my great weapons that slay hundreds
and thousands at a time, then I can, O Bharata, finish the slaughter in a
month.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Hearing these words of Bhīṣma, king Duryodhana then
asked Drōṇa, O monarch, that foremost one of Angira’s race, saying, “O
preceptor, in what time canst thou annihilate the troops of Pāṁḍū’s son?”
 Thus addressed by him, Drōṇa said smilingly, “I am old, O mighty-armed
one! My energy and activity have both become weak. With the phāyara of my
weapons I can consume the army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, like Saṁtānu’s son
Bhīṣma, I think, in a month’s time. Even this is the limit of my power,
even this is the limit of my strength.” Then Saradvata’s son Kr̥pā said
that he could annihilate the foe in two month’s time. Drōṇa’s son
(Asvatthamana) pledged himself to annihilate the Pāṁḍava army in ten
nights. Karanā, however, acquainted as he was with weapons of high
efficacy, pledged himself to achieve that feat in five days. Hearing the
words of the Sutā’s son the son of the ocean-going (Ganga) laughed aloud
and said, “As long, O son of Rādhā, as thou encounterest not in battle
Prathā with his arrows, conch, and bows and rushing to the combat on his
car with Vasudeva in his company, so long mayest thou think so! Why, thou
art capable of saying anything, even what thou pleasest!”’”



SECTION SĪĒKSASĪVĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing these words (of the leaders of the Kuru
army), Kuṁtī’s son Yudhiṣṭhira, summoning all his brothers, said unto
them these words in private.

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘The spies I had placed in the army of
Dhritarashtra’s son, brought me this news in the morning. Duryodhana
asked Ganga’s son of great vows, saying, “O lord, in what time canst thou
annihilate the troops of Pāṁḍū’s sons?” Indeed, the wicked Duryodhana was
answered by him in these words, viz.,--In a month! Drōṇa also declared
that he could do the same feat in about the same time. Gautama (Kr̥pā)
indicated twice that period, as hātha been heard by us. Drōṇa’s son
acquainted with weapons of high efficacy declared the period (in his
case) to be ten nights. Karanā also, acquainted with weapons of high
efficacy, asked in the midst of the Kurusa, declared that thy could
complete the slaughter in five days. Therefore, I also, O Arjuna, am
desirous of hearing thy words. In what time canst thou, O Phālgunī,
exterminate the foe?’ Thus addressed by the king, Dhanaṁjaya of curly
hair, casting a look upon Vasudeva, said these words, ‘All these (Bhīṣma
and others) are high-souled (warriors), accomplished in arms and
acquainted with all modes of warfare. Without doubt, O king, they can
exterminate (our forces) even thus! Let thy heart’s anguish, however, be
dispelled. I tell thee truly that with Vasudeva as my ally, I can, on a
siṁgala car, exterminate the three worlds with even the immortals, indeed,
all mobile creatures that were, are, will be, in the twinkling of the
eye. This is what I think. That terrible and mighty weapon which the Lord
of all creatures (Mahādēva) gave me on the occasion of my hand-to-hand
encounter with him (in the guise of) a hunter, still existeth with me.
Indeed, O tiger among men, that weapon which the Lord of all creatures
usēṭha at the end of Yugā for destroying created things, existeth with me.
Ganga’s son knoweth not that weapon; nor Drōṇa nor Gautama (Kr̥pā); nor
Drōṇa’s son, O king! How, therefore, can the Sutā’s son know it? It is
not, however, proper to slay ordinary men in battle by means of celestial
weapons. We shall (on the other band) vanquish our foes in a fair fight.
Then, these tigers among men, O king, are thy allies! All of them are
well-versed in celestial weapons, and all of them are eager for battle.
All of them after their initiation in the Vēdāsa, have undergone the final
bath in sacrifices. All of them are anavaiṁkviśḍa. They are competent, O
son of Pāṁḍū, to slay in battle the army of even the celestials. Thou
hast for thy allies Sikhaṁdina, and Yuyudhanā and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of
Pr̥ṣata’s race; and Bhīmasēna, and these twins, and Yudhāmanyu, and
Uttamaujasa, and Virāṭa and Drupada who are equal in battle unto Bhīṣma
and Drōṇa; and the mighty-armed Saṁkhā, and Hiḍimvā’s son of great might;
and this latter’s son Aṁjanaparavāna endued with great strength and prowess;
and Sinī’s descendant of mighty arms and well-versed in battle, and the
mighty Abhimanyu and the five sons of Draupadī! Thou art thyself, again,
competent to exterminate the three worlds! O thou that art endued with
effulgence equal unto that of Sakarā himself, I know it, O Kaurava, for it
is manifest, that that man upon whom thou mayest cast thy eyes in anger
is sure to be annihilated!’”



SECTION SĪĒKSASĪVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Next morning, under a cloudless sky, all the kings,
urged by Dhritarashtra’s son, Duryodhana, set out against the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
And all of them had purified themselves by baths, were decked in
garlands, and attired in white robes. And having poured libations on
phāyara, caused Brāhmaṇa to utter benedictions on them, they took up their
weapons and raised their (respective) standards. And all of them were
conversant with the Vēdāsa, and endued with great bravery, and had
practised excellent vows. And all of them were grantors of (other
people’s) wishes, and all were skilled in battle. Endued with great
strength, they set out, reposing confidence on one another, and with
singleness of purpose desiring to win in battle the highest regions. And
first Viṁdā and Anuvinda, both of Avanti, and Kēkāyāsa, and the Vāhalikāsa,
all set out with Bhāradvāja’s son at their head. Then came Asvatthamana,
and Saṁtānu’s son (Bhīṣma), and Jayadratha of the country of the Siṁdhu,
and the kings of the southern and the western countries and of the hilly
regions, and Sakunī, the ruler of the Gaṁdhārasa, and all the chiefs of
the eastern and the northern regions, and the Sakasa, the Kirātōṁ, and
Yavanōṁ, the Sivis and the Vasatīsa with their Mahārathōṁ at the heads of
their respective divisions. All these great car-warriors marched in the
second division. Then came Kr̥tavarmana at the head of his troops, and
that mighty car-warrior, viz., the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, and the king
Duryodhana surrounded by his brothers, and Sālā, and Bhūrisrāvāsa, and
Salyā, and Vr̥hadratha, the ruler of the Kōsālā. These all marched in
the rear, with Dhritarashtra’s sons at their head. And all these
Dhartarāṣṭrāsa endued with great might, uniting together in proper order,
and all clad in mail, took up their position at the other end of
Kurukṣētra, and, O Bharata, Duryodhana caused his encampment to be so
adorned as to make it look like a second Hastināpura. Indeed, O king,
even those that were clever among the citizens of Hastināpura could not
distinguish their city from the encampment. And the Kuru king caused
inaccessible pavilions, similar to his own, to be erected by hundreds and
thousands for the (other) kings (in his army). And those tents, O king,
for the accommodation of the troops were well-planted on an area
measuring full five yōjanāsa of that field of battle. And iṁṭō those tents
by thousands that were full of provisions, the rulers of the earth
entered, each according to his courage according to the strength he
possessed. And king Duryodhana ordered excellent provisions to be
supplied for all those high-souled kings with their troops consisting of
infantry, elephants, and horses, and with all their followers. And as
regards all those that subsisted upon mechanical arts and all the bards,
singers, and panegyrists devoted to his cause, and vendors and traders,
and prostitutes, and spies, and persons who had come to witness the
battle, the Kuru king made due provision for all of them.”



SECTION CXCIX

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Like Duryodhana, king Yudhiṣṭhira also, the son of
Kuṁtī and Dharma, ordered out, O Bharata, his heroic warriors headed by
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. Indeed, he ordered that slayer of foes and commander of
force, that leader, steady in prowess, of the Cēḍisa, the Kasīsa, and the
Karuṣōṁ, viz., Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, as also Virāṭa, and Drupada, and Yuyudhanā,
and Sikhaṁdina, and those two mighty bowmen, those two princes of
Paṁcāla, viz., Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujasa, to set out. Those brave
warriors, cased in handsome coats of mail and decked with golden
ear-rings, blazed forth like fires on the sacrificial altar when fed with
clarified butter. Indeed, those mighty bowmen looked resplendent like the
planets in the firmament. Then that bull among men king Yudhiṣṭhira,
having duly honoured all his combatants, ordered them to march. And king
Yudhiṣṭhira ordered excellent provisions of food for those high-souled
kings with their troops consisting of infantry, and elephants and horses,
and with all their followers, as also for all those that subsisted on
mechanical arts. And the son of Pāṁḍū first ordered Abhimanyu, and
Vr̥hanta, and the five sons of Draupadī, to march with Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna at
their head. And he then ḍispaicḍa Bhima, and Dhanaṁjaya the son of
Pāṁḍū, in the second division of his forces. And the din made by the men
moving and running about for harnessing their steeds and elephants and
loading the cars with implements of battle, and the shouts of the
cheerful combatants, seemed to touch the very heavens. And last of all,
the king marched himself, accompanied by Virāṭa and Drupada and the other
monarchs (on his side). And that army of fierce bowmen commanded by
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, hitherto stationed in one place, but now extended iṁṭō
columns for marching, looked like the (impetuous) current of Ganga. Then
the intelligent Yudhiṣṭhira depending on his wisdom, disposed his
divisions in a different order, confounding the sons of Dhritarashtra.
And the son of Pāṁḍū ordered that those mighty bowmen, the (five) sons of
Draupadī and Abhimanyu, and Nakula, and Sahadeva, and all the
Prabhadrakāsa, and ten thousand horses, and two thousand elephants, and
ten thousand foot-soldiers, and five hundred cars, constituting the first
irresistible division of his army, should be placed under the command of
Bhīmasēna. And he placed in the middle division of his army Virāṭa and
Jayatsēna, and those two mighty car-warriors, viz., Yudhāmanyu and
Uttamaujā, the two high-souled princes of Paṁcāla, both endued with
great prowess and both armed with mace and bow. And in this middle
division marched Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya. There were (placed) combatants
highly accomplished in arms and burning with anger. Amongst them were
steeds ridden by brave warriors, and five thousand elephants, and crowds
of cars all around. And foot-soldiers in thousands, that were all brave
and armed with bows, swords, and maces, marched behind them, as thousands
marched before them. And in that part of that sea of troops, where
Yudhiṣṭhira himself was, there were stationed numerous lords of earth.
And there also were thousands of elephants, and steeds by ten thousands,
and cars and foot-soldiers also by thousands. And there also marched, O
bull among kings, Cēkitānā with his own large force, and king
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, the leader of the Cēḍisa. And there also was that mighty
bowman, Satyakī, the foremost car-warrior of the Vr̥ṣṇi, that mighty
combatant, surrounded by hundreds and thousands of cars and leading (them
to battle)! And those bulls among men, Kṣatrahaṇa and Kṣatradēva,
mounted on their cars, marched behind, protecting the rear. And there (in
the rear) were the vaigansa, stalls, uniforms, vehicles and draft animals.
There also were thousands of elephants and horses by tens of thousands.
And taking all the inavailiḍsa and women, and all that were emaciated and
weak, and all the animals carrying his treasures, and all his granaries,
with the aid of his elephant-divisions, Yudhiṣṭhira marched slowly. And
he was followed by Saucitti, who steadily adhered to truth and was
invincible in battle, and Śrēṇīmata, and Vasudeva and Vibhu, the son of
the ruler of Kāsī, with twenty thousand cars, and hundred million steeds
of high mettle, each bearing scores of bells on its limbs, and twenty
thousand smiting elephants with tusks as long as plough-shares, all of
good breed and divided temples and all resembling moving masses of
clouds. Indeed, these usually walked behind those monarchs. Besides
these, O Bharata, the elephants that Yudhiṣṭhira had in his seven
Akṣauhiṇī, numbering seventy thousand with humour trickling down their
trunks and from their mouths, and resembling (on that account) showering
clouds, also followed the king, like moving hills.

“Thus was arrayed that terrible force of the intelligent son of Kuṁtī.
And relying upon that force he battled with Suyōdhana, the son of
Dhritarashtra. Besides those already named, other men by hundreds and
thousands and tens of thousands, in divisions numbering by thousands,
followed (the Pāṁḍava army), roaring loudly. And the warriors by
thousands and ten thousands, filled with joy, beat their drums by
thousands and blew conchs by tens of thousands!”

The End of Udyōga Parva



FOOTNOTES

1. i.e., passage of the sun from the winter to the summer solstice.

2. Divination was practised by reference to the stars in the night.

3. The question that Dhritarashtra asks is easy enough. The R̥ṣi having
applauded knowledge and its efficacy in procuring emancipation, the king
asks, if knowledge is of such efficacy, what then is the value of Karmā
or acts, i.e. prayers and sacrifices as ordained in the Vēdāsa? Ijyayā is
the instrumental form of Ijyā, meaning sacrifices, religious rites, and
ceremonies. Parārthama is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha to mean
Mōkṣaprāpakatvaṁ, i.e., capacity to lead to emancipation. It should be
noted here that the Hindu idea of emancipation is not bliss enjoyed by a
conscious Self, but freedom from the obligation of rē-birth and Karmā.
Mērē Karmā, as such, implies pain and misery and the Supreme Soul
(Pārā-Brahman) is without action and attributes. Although other kinds of
salvation are spoken of in other systems of philosophy, the emancipation
that forms the subject of these queries and answers, is freedom from this
Karmā.

4. The R̥ṣi answers,--Yes, Karmā or action does, indeed, lead to the
emancipate state. In the regions, of which thou speakest, there are both
bliss and emancipation (Arthajātā) is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha to mean
Bhōjā-mōkṣākhya-prayōjana sāmānyama. The second line is elliptical, the
construction being Parātmā anīhā (san) param āyatī; (anyathā-tu) mārjēnā
mārgana nihatya param (prayati). Parātmā is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha, to
mean one who regards the material body to be Self. In the succeeding
Slōkōṁ the R̥ṣi uses the word dēhīṁ which, in this connection, is the
same as dēhābhimānī. The R̥ṣi’s answer is,--The materialist, by
renouncing desire, aṭainētha to the state of the Supreme Soul, i.e.,
emancipation. The sense seems to be that by renouncing desire, both
actions and attributes are lost. The state, therefore, of such a soul is
one of inaction, or perfect quietude and the absence of attributes, which
is exactly the nature of the Supreme Soul. If, again, emancipation be
sought without extinguishing desire, i.e., by the aid of work (prayers
and sacrifices), it is to be attained “by extinguishing path by a path,”
 i.e., the seeker is to proceed along a definite or prescribed or ordained
route, taking care that the portions of the route he once passes over may
not have to be rē-trodden by him. Action, as explained in a subsequent
Slōkā, leadeth, it is true to regions of bliss and emancipation, but that
state is transitory, for when the merit is extinguished, the state that
was attained in consequence of it, is extinguished, and the person
falling off, has to recommence action. If, therefore, permanent
emancipation is to be attained, the obligation of rē-commencing action
must be got rid of, i.e., care must be taken that the portions of the
route once passed over may not have to be rē-trodden.

5. Apparently this question of Dhritarashtra is not connected with what
precedes. The connection however, is intimate, and the question follows
as a corollary from the R̥ṣi’s last answer. The R̥ṣi having said that
the ordinary soul, by a certain process (i.e., renunciation of desire)
attains to the state of the Supreme Soul, Dhritarashtra infers that vice
versa, it is the Supreme Soul that becomes the ordinary soul, for (as
Nīlakaṁṭha puts it in the phraseology of the Nyaya school) things
different cannot become what they are not and unless things are similar,
they cannot become of the same nature. Applying this maxim of the Nyaya
it is seen that when the ordinary soul becomes the Supreme Soul, these
are not different, and, therefore, it is the Supreme Soul that becomes
the ordinary soul. Under this impression Dhritarashtra asks,--Well, if it
is the Supreme Soul that becomes the ordinary soul, who is it that urgeth
the Supreme Soul to become so? And if all this (universe) be indeed, that
Soul, in consequence of the latter pervading and entering iṁṭō
everything, then divested of desire as the Supreme Soul is, where is the
possibility of its action (action or work being the direct consequence of
desire)? If it is answered that the universe is the Deity’s līlā (mērē
sport, as some schools of philosophy assert), then, as every sport is
ascribable to some motive of happiness, what can be the happiness of the
Deity, who, as presupposed, is without desire?

6. The R̥ṣi answers--There is a great objection in admitting the
complete or essential identity of things different, i.e., the ordinary
soul and Supreme Soul being different, their identity cannot be admitted.
As regards creatures, they flow continually from Anādi-yoga, i.e., the
union of the Supreme Soul (which in itself is Unconditioned) with the
conditions of space, time etc.; i.e., there is this much of identity,
therefore between the ordinary and the Supreme Soul, but not a complete
or essential identity. It is also in consequence of this that the
superiority of the Supreme Soul is not lost (the opposite theory would be
destructive of that superiority). The favourite analogy of the thinkers
of this school for explaining the connection of the Supreme Soul with the
universe is derived from the connection of Akāsā with Ghaṭakasā, i.e.,
space absolute and unconditioned and space as confined by the limits of a
vessel. The latter has a name, is moved when the vessel is moved, and is
limited in space; while space itself, of which the vessel’s space forms a
part, is absolute and unconditioned, immovable, and unlimited.

7. Cars, elephants, horses, infantry, vehicles other than cars, and
warriors fighting from the backs of camels.

8. Called also the Baṛavā phāyara.

9. The allusion is to the incarnation of Vishnu as the Horse-necked.
Nīlakaṁṭha explains suvarṇākhyāma Jagata to be Veda prāṁca, i.e., the whole
Vēdāsa with all their contents. According to him, the sense of the passage
is that Vishnu in that form swells with his own voice the Vedic notes
chanted by the Brāhmaṇa.

10. Paṭautī Jālama sravantiti paṭalama. Thus Nīlakaṁṭha.

11. Literally, one that hātha a beautiful or excellent face.

12. The story of Viśvāmitra’s promotion to the status of a Brahmana is
highly characteristic. Engaged in a dispute with the Brahmana R̥ṣi
Vaśiṣṭha, Viśvāmitra who was a Kshatriya king (the son of Kuśikā) found,
by bitter experience, that Kshatriya energy and might backed by the whole
science of arms, availed nothing against a Brahmana’s might, for
Vaśiṣṭha by his ascetic powers created myriads and myriads of fierce
troops who inflicted a signala defeat on the great Kshatriya king. Baffled
thus, Viśvāmitra retired to the breast of Himāvata and paid court to Siva.
The great God appeared and Viśvāmitra begged him for the mastery of the
whole science of weapons. The god granted his prayer. Viśvāmitra then
came back and sought an encounter with Vaśiṣṭha, but the latter by the
aid only of his Brahmanical (bamboo) stick baffled the fiercest weapons
of Viśvāmitra, of even celestial efficacy. Humiliated and disgraced,
Viśvāmitra set his heart on becoming a Brahmana. He gave up his kingdom
and retiring iṁṭō the woods with his queen began to practise to severest
austerities. After the expiration of ten thousand years, the Creator
Brahma appeared before him and addressed him as a royal R̥ṣi. Dispirited
at this, he devoted himself to still severer austerities. At last, at
Dharma’s command (as here referred to) the great Kshatriya king became a
Brahmana. This, in the Hindu scriptures, is the sole instance of a person
belonging to a lower order becoming a Brahmana by ascetic austerities.

13. These articles of cognate origin are clarified butter, milka, and
other things used as libations in sacrifices.

14. i.e., the subdivisions of the Praṇava, the mysterious Maṁtra, which
is the beginning of everything, were first promulgated here. Nīlakaṁṭha
supposes this to refer to the origin of the Vēdāsa, the Upanishads, and
the various branches of the Srutisa and the Smritis.

15. Small divisions of time.

16. The limbs that should be ‘prominent’ or ‘elevated’ in order to
constitute an indication of byūṭī or auspiciousness are variously
mentioned. The general opinion seems to be that these six only, viz., the
back of each palm, the two dorsa, and the two bosoms should be elevated.
Another opinion would seem to indicate that the two bosoms, the two hips,
and the two eyes should be so. The seven that should be delicate or
slender are unanimously mentioned as the skin, the hair, the teeth, the
fingers of the hands, the fingers of the feet, the waist, and the neck.
The three that should be deep are the navel, the voice, and the
understanding. The five that should be red are the two palms, the two
outer corners of the eyes, the tongue, the nether and the upper-lips, and
the palate. These five also, are variously given.

17. The latter half of this Slōkā is variously read. The correct reading,
I apprehend, is Niyamanānī Saṁtarē Hr̥tanyāsana Vitastayā, i.e., ‘while
transported across, were taken (down) by the (river) Vitastā’--the latter
being one of the five rivers of the Punjab.

18. The science of arms (Dhanurvēda) classes arms under four heads, viz.,
Mukta, Amukta, Muktāmukta, and Yaṁtramukta. A Mukta weapon is one that is
hurled from the hand, as a discus. An Amukta is not hurled from the hand,
as a sword. A Muktāmukta is one that is sometimes hurled and sometimes
not, as a mace. A Yaṁtramukta is one shot from a machine, as an arrow or
a ball. All Mukta weapons are Ēsṭrāsa, while all Amukta ones are called
śāstrōṁ.

19. The thousand-handed Arjuna, called also Kārtavīryārjuna, the
vanquisher of Ravānā, the chief of Haihaya clan of Kṣatriyōṁ having his
capital at Mahiṣmati on the banks of the Narmadā (Nērabuḍā), was slain by
Rama.









The Mahābhārata

of

Krishna-Dvaipāyana Vyāsa

BOOK 6

BHĪṢMA PARVA

Translated iṁṭō English Prose from the Original Sanskrit Text

by

Kisārī Mōhana Gāṁgulī

[1883-1896]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, January, 2004. Proofed by John Bruno Harē.



THE MAHĀBHĀRATA

BHĪṢMA PARVA

SECTION I

(Jamavū-khanda Nirmāṇa Parva)

OM! HAVING BOWED down to Nārāyaṇa, and Nārā, the most exalted of male
beings, and also to the goddess Sarasvatī, must the word ‘Jāyā’ be
uttered.

Janamējaya said,--“How did those heroes, the Kurusa, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the
Sōmakasa, and the high-souled kings assembled together from various
countries, fight?”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said,--“Listen thou, O lord of the earth, how those
heroes,--the Kurusa, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the Sōmakasa,--fought on the sacred
plain of the Kurukṣētra.[1] Entering Kurukṣētra, the Pāṁḍavōṁ endued
with great might, along with the Sōmakasa, advanced, desirous of victory,
against the Kauravas. Accomplished in the study of the Vēdāsa, all (of
them) took great delight in battle. Expectant of success in battle, with
their troops (they) faced the fight. Approaching the army of
Dhritarashtra’s son, those (warriors) invincible in battle[2] stationed
themselves with their troops on the western part (of the plain), their
faces turned towards the east. Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, caused
tents by thousands to be set up according to rule, beyond the region
called Sāmaṁtapaṁcakā. The whole earth seemed then to be empty, divested
of horses and men, destitute of cars and elephants, and with only the
children and the old left (at home). From the whole area of Jamvudvīpā
over which the sun sheds his rays,[3] was collected that force, O best of
kings. Men of all races,[4] assembled together, occupied an area
extending for many Yōjanāsa over districts, rivers, hills, and woods. That
bull among men, king Yudhiṣṭhira, ordered excellent food and other
articles of enjoyment for all of them along with their animals. And
Yudhiṣṭhira fixed diverse watch-words for them; so that one saying this
should be known as belonging to the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And that descendant of
Kuru’s race also settled names and badges for all of them for recognition
during time of battle.

“Bihōlḍiṁga the standard-top of Pr̥thā’s son, the high-souled son of
Dhritarashtra, with a white umbrella held over his head, in the midst of
a thousand elephants, and surrounded by his century of brothers, began
with all the kings (on his side) to array his troops against the son of
Pāṁḍū. Seeing Duryodhana, the Pāṁcāla who took delight in battle, were
filled with joy and blew their loud-sounding conches and cymbals of sweet
sounds. Bihōlḍiṁga those troops so delighted, Pāṁḍū’s son and Vasudeva of
great energy had their hearts filled with joy. And those tigers among
men, Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya, seated on one car, having felt great joy,
both blew their celestial conches. And hearing the blare of Gigēṁṭiyā and
the loud blast of Theodotes belonging unto the two, the combatants
ejected urine and excreta. As other animals are filled with fear on
hearing the voice of the roaring lion, even so became that force upon
hearing those blasts. A frightful dust arose and nothing could be seen,
for the sun himself, suddenly enveloped by it, seemed to have set.[5] A
black cloud poured a shower of flesh and blood over the troops all
around. All this seemed extraordinary. A wind rose there, bearing along
the earth myriads of stony nodules, and afflicting therewith the
combatants by hundreds and thousands. (For all that), O monarch, both
armies, filled with joy, stood addrest for battle, on Kurukṣētra like
two agitated oceans. Indeed, that encounter of the two armies was highly
wonderful, like that of two oceans when the end of the Yugā is arrived.
The whole earth was empty, having only the children and the old left (at
home), in consequence of that large army mustered by the Kauravas.[6]
Then the Kurusa, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the Sōmakasa made certain covenants, and
settled the rules, O bull of Bharata’s race, regarding the different
kinds of combat. Persons equally circumstanced must encounter each other,
fighting fairly. And if having fought fairly the combatants withdraw
(without fear of molestation), even that would be gratifying to us. Those
who engaged in contests of words should be fought against with words.
Those that left the ranks should never be slain.[7] A car-warrior should
have a car-warrior for his antagonist; he on the neck of an elephant
should have a similar combatant for his foe; a horse should be met by a
horse, and a foot-soldier, O Bharata, should be met by a foot-soldier.
Guided by considerations of fitness, willingness, daring and might, one
should strike another, giving notice. No one should strike another that
is unprepared[8] or panic-struck. One engaged with another, one seeking
quarter, one retreating, one whose weapon is rendered unfit, uncased in
mail, should never be struck. Car-drivers, animals (yoked to cars or
carrying weapons), men engaged in the transport of weapons,[9] players on
drums and blowers of conches should never be struck. Having made these
covenants, the Kurusa, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the Sōmakasa wondered much,
gazing at each other. And having stationed (their forces thus), those
bulls among men, those high-souled ones, with their troops, became glad
at heart, their joy being reflected on their countenances.”



SECTION II

Vaisaṁpāyanā said,--“Seeing then the two armies (standing) on the east
and the west for the fierce battle that was impending, the holy R̥ṣi
Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī, that foremost of all persons acquainted with
the Vēdāsa, that grandsire of the Bhāratōṁ, conversant with the past, the
present, and the future, and bihōlḍiṁga everything as if it were present
before his eyes, said these words in private unto the royal son of
Vicitravīrya who was then distressed and giving way to sorrow,
reflecting on the evil policy of his sons.

“Vyāsa said,--‘O king, thy sons and the other monarchs have their hour
arrived.[10] Mustered in battle they will kill one another. O Bharata,
their hour having come, they will all perish. Bearing in mind the changes
brought on by time, do not yield thy heart to grief. O king, if thou wish
to see them (fighting) in battle, I will, O son, grant thee vision.
Behold the battle.’

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘O best of regenerate R̥ṣi, I like not to behold
the slaughter of kinsmen. I shall, however, through thy potency hear of
this battle minutely.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued.--“Upon his not wishing to see the battle but
wishing to hear of it, Vyāsa, that lord of būnsa, gave a boon to Saṁjaya.
(And addressing Dhritarashtra he said),--‘This Saṁjaya, O king, will
describe the battle to thee. Nothing in the whole battle will be beyond
this one’s eyes. Endued, O king with celestial vision, Saṁjaya will
narrate the battle to thee. He will have knowledge of everything.
Manifest or concealed, (happening) by day or by night, even that which is
thought of in the mind, Saṁjaya shall know everything. Weapons will not
cut him and exertion will not fatigue him. This son of Gavalaganī will
come out of the battle with life. As regards myself, O bull of Bharata’s
race, the fame of these Kurusa, as also of all the Pāṁḍavōṁ, I will
spread. Do not grieve. This is destiny, O tiger among men. It bēhōvētha
thee not to give way to grief. It is not capable of being prevented. As
regards victory, it is there where righteousness is.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued,--“That highly-blessed and holy grandsire of the
Kurusa, having said so, once more addressed Dhritarashtra and
said,--‘Great will the slaughter be, O monarch, in this battle. I see
here also (numerous) omens indicative of terror. Hawks and vultures, and
crows and herons, together with cranes, are alighting on the tops of
trees and gathering in flocks. These birds, delighted at the prospect of
battle, are looking down (on the field) before them. Carnivorous beasts
will feed on the flesh of elephants and steeds. Fierce herons, foreboding
terror, and uttering merciless cries, are wheeling across the centre
towards the southern region. In both the twilights, prior and posterior,
I daily behold, O Bharata, the sun during his rising and setting to be
covered by headless trunks. Tri-coloured clouds with their extremities
white and red and necks black, charged with lightning, and resembling
maces (in figure) envelope the sun in both twilights. I have seen the
sun, the moon, and the stars to be all blazing. No difference in their
aspect is to be noted in the evening. I have seen this all day and all
night. All this phōrbōḍsa fear. On even the fifteenth night of the
lighted-fortnight in (the month of) Kārtika, the moon, divested of
splendour, became invisible, or of the hue of phāyara, the firmament being
of the hue of the lotus. Many heroic lords of earth, kings and princes,
endued with great bravery and possessed of arms resembling maces, will be
slain and sleep lying down on the earth. Daily I notice in the sky during
night time the fierce cries of battling boars and cats.[11] The images of
gods and goddesses sometimes laugh, sometimes tremble, and sometimes
again these vomit blood through their mouths and sometimes they sweat and
sometimes fall down. O monarch! drums, without being beaten, give sounds,
and the great cars of Kṣatriyōṁ move without (being drawn by) animals
yoked to them. Kōkilā, wood-peckers, jaws, water-cocks, parrots, crows,
and peacocks, utter terrible cries. Here and there, cavalry soldiers,
cased in mail, armed with weapons, send forth fierce shouts. At sun-rise
flights of insects by hundreds are seen. In both twilights, the cardinal
quarters seem to be ablaze, and the clouds, O Bharata, shower dust and
flesh. She, O king, who is celebrated over the three worlds and is
applauded by the righteous, even that (constellation) Aruṁdhati keepeth
(her lord) Vaśiṣṭha on her back. The planet Sani also, O king, appeareth
afflicting (the constellation) Rōhiṇī. The sign of the deer in the Moon
hātha deviated from its usual position. A great terror is indicated. Even
though the sky is cloudless, a terrible roar is heard there. The animals
are all weeping and their tears are falling fast.’”



SECTION III

“Vyāsa said,--‘Asses are taking births in kine. Some are having sexual
pleasure with mothers. The trees in the forests are exhibiting
unseasonable flowers and fruits. Women quick with child, and even those
that are not so, are giving birth to monsters. Carnivorous beasts,
mingling with (carnivorous) birds, are feeding together. Ill-omened
beasts, some having three horns, some with four eyes, some with five
legs, some with two sexual organs, some with two heads, some with two
tails, some having fierce teeth, are being born, and with mouths wide
open are uttering unholy cries. Horses with three legs, furnished with
crests, having four teeth, and endued with horns, are also being born. O
king! in thy city is also seen that the wives of many utterers of Brahma
are bringing forth Garudāsa and peacocks. The mare is bringing forth the
cow-calf and the bitch is bringing forth, O king, jackals and cocks, and
antelopes and parrots are all uttering inauspicious cries.[12] Certain
women are bringing forth four or five daughters (at a time), and these as
soon as they are born, dance and sing and laugh. The members of the
lowest orders are laughing and dancing and singing, and thus indicating
direful consequences. Infants, as if urged by death, are drawing armed
images, and are running against one another, armed with clubs, and
desirous of battle are also breaking down the towns (they erect in
sport). Lotuses of different kinds and lilies are growing on trees.
Strong winds are blowing fiercely and the dust ceaseth not. The earth is
frequently trembling, and Rāhu aprōcētha towards the sun. The white
planet (Kētu) stayeth, having passed beyond the constellation Chitra. All
this particularly bōḍētha the destruction of the Kurusa. A fierce comet
risētha, afflicting the constellation Pusya. This great planet will cause
frightful mischief to both the armies. Mars wheeleth towards Māghā and
Vr̥haspati (Jupiter) towards Śravaṇa. The Sun’s offspring (Sani)
approaching towards the constellation Bhaga, afflicteth it. The planet
Sukarā, ascending towards Pūrva Bhadrā, shineth brilliantly, and wheeling
towards the Uttara Bhadrā, looketh towards it, having effected a junction
(with a smaller planet). The white planet (Kētu), blazing up like phāyara
mixed with smoke, stayeth, having attacked the bright constellation
Jēṣṭha that is sacred to Indra. The constellation Dhruva, blazing
fiercely, wheeleth towards the right. Both the Moon and the Sun are
afflicting Rōhiṇī. The fierce planet (Rāhu) hātha taken up its position
between the constellations Chitra and Swati.[13] The red-bodied (Mars)
possessed of the effulgence of phāyara, wheeling circuitously, stayeth in a
line with the constellation Śravaṇa over-ridden by Vr̥haspati. The earth
that produceth particular crops at particular seasons is now covered with
the crops of every season.[14] Every barley-stalk is graced with five
ears, and every paddy-stalk with a hundred. They that are the best of
creatures in the worlds and upon whom depends the universe, viz., kine,
when milked after the calves have their suck, yield only blood. Radiant
rays of light emanate from bows, and swords blaze forth brilliantly. It
is evident that the weapons behold (before them) the battle, as if it
were already arrived. The hue of weapons and the water, as also of coats
of mail and standards, is like that of phāyara. A great slaughter will take
place. In this battle,[15] O Bharata, of the Kurusa with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the
earth, O monarch, will be a river of blood with the standards (of
warriors) as its rafts. Animals and birds on all sides, with mouths
blazing like phāyara, uttering fierce cries, and displaying these evil
omens, are foreboding terrible consequences. A (fierce) bird with but one
wing, one eye, and one leg, hovering over the sky in the night, screameth
frightfully in wrath, as if for making the hearers vomit blood. It
seemeth, O great king, that all weapons are now blazing with radiance.
The effulgence of the constellation known by the name of the seven
high-souled R̥ṣiyōṁ, hātha been dimmed. Those two blazing planets, viz.,
Vr̥haspati and Sani, having approached the constellation called Viśākhā,
have become stationary there for a whole year. Three lunations twice
meeting together in course of the same lunar fortnight, the duration of
the latter is shortened by two days.[16] On the thirteenth day therefore,
from the first lunation, according as it is the day of the full moon or
the new moon, the moon and the sun are afflicted by Rāhu. Such strange
eclipses, both lunar and solar, forebode a great slaughter.[17] All the
quarters of the earth, being overwhelmed by showers of dust, look
inauspicious. Fierce clouds, portentous of danger, drop bloody showers
during the night. Rāhu of fierce deeds is also, O monarch, afflicting the
constellation Kīrtikā. Rough winds, pōrṭēṁḍiṁga fierce danger, are
constantly blowing. All these beget a vāra characterised by many sad
incidents.[18] The constellations are divided iṁṭō three classes. Upon
one or another of each class, a planet of evil omen has shed its
influence, foreboding terrible dangers.[19] A lunar fortnight had
hitherto consisted of fourteen days, or fifteen days (as usual), or
sixteen days. This, however, I never knew that the day of new-moon would
be on the thirteenth day from the first lunation, or the day of full-moon
on the thirteenth day from the same. And yet in course of the same month
both the Moon and the Sun have undergone eclipses on the thirteenth days
from the day of the first lunation.[20] The Sun and the Moon therefore,
by undergoing eclipses on unusual days,[21] will cause a great slaughter
of the creatures of the earth. Indeed, Rākṣasa, though drinking blood
by mouthful, will yet not be satiated. The great rivers are flowing in
opposite directions. The waters of rivers have become bloody. The wells,
foaming up, are bellowing like bulls.[22] Meteors, effulgent like Indra’s
thunder-bolt, fall with loud hisses.[23] When this night paisētha away,
evil consequences will overtake you. People, for meeting together, coming
out of their houses with lighted brands, have still to encounter a thick
gloom all round.[24] Great R̥ṣiyōṁ have said that in view of such
circumstances the earth drinks the blood of thousands of kings. From the
mountains of Kailāsā and Maṁdarā and Himāvata thousands of explosions are
heard and thousands of summits are tumbling down. In consequence of the
Earth’s trembling, each of the four oceans having swelled greatly, seems
ready to transgress its continents for afflicting the Earth.[25] Fierce
winds charged with pointed pebbles are blowing, crushing mighty trees. In
villages and towns trees, ordinary and sacred, are falling down, crushed
by mighty winds and struck by lightning. The (sacrificial) phāyara, when
Brāhmaṇa pour libations on it, becomes blue, or red, or yellow. Its
flames bend towards the left, yielding a bad scent, accompanied by loud
reports. Touch, smell, and taste have, O monarch, become what they were
not. The standards (of warriors), repeatedly trembling are emitting
smoke. Drums and cymbals are throwing off showers of coal-dust. And from
the tops of tall trees all around, crows, wheeling in circles from the
left, are uttering fierce cries. All of them again are uttering frightful
cries of pakkā, pakkā and are perching upon the tops of standards for the
destruction of the kings. Vicious elephants, trembling all over, are
running hither and thither, urinating and ejecting excreta. The horses
are all melancholy, while the elephants are resorting to the water.
Hearing all this, let that be done which is suitable, so that, O Bharata,
the world may not be depopulated.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued,--“Hearing these words of his father,
Dhritarashtra said,--‘I think all this hātha been ordained of old. A great
slaughter of human beings will take place. If the kings die in battle
observing the duties of the Kshatriya order, they will then, attaining to
the regions reserved for heroes, obtain only happiness. These tigers
among men, casting away their lives in great battle, will win fame in
this and great bliss for ever in the next world.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued,--“O best of kings, thus addressed by his son
Dhritarashtra, that prince of poets, the Muni (Vyāsa) concentrated his
mind in supreme Yoga. Having contemplated for only a short space of time,
Vyāsa once more said,--‘Without doubt, O king of kings, it is Time that
ḍēsṭrōyētha the universe. It is Time also that createth the worlds. There
is nothing here that is eternal. Show the path of righteousness to the
Kurusa, to thy kinsmen, relatives, and friends. Thou art competent to
restrain them. The slaughter of kinsmen hātha been said to be sinful. Do
not do that which is disagreeable to me. O king, Death himself hātha been
born in the shape of thy son. Slaughter is never applauded in the Vēdāsa.
It can never be beneficial. The usages of one’s race are as one’s own
body. Those usages slay him that ḍēsṭrōyētha them. For the destruction of
this race and of those kings of the earth it is Time that maketh thee
deviate iṁṭō the wrong path like one in distress, although thou art
competent (to walk along the path of righteousness). O king, in the shape
of thy kingdom hātha calamity come to thee. Thy virtue is sustaining a
very great diminution.[26] Show what righteousness is unto thy sons. O
thou that art invincible, of what value is that kingdom to thee which
bringeth sina to thee? Take care of thy good name, thy virtue, and thy
fame. Thou wilt then win heaven. Let the Pāṁḍavōṁ have their kingdom, and
let the Kauravas have peace.’”

“While that best of Brāhmaṇa was saying these words in a sorrowful tone,
Dhritarashtra, the son of Aṁbikā, accomplished in speech, once more
addressed him, saying.--‘My knowledge of life and death is similar to
thine. The truth is known to me as regards these. Man, however, in what
concerns his own interests, is deprived of judgment. O sirē, know me to
be one who is an ordinary person. Of immeasurable power thou art. I pray
thee to extend thine towards us. Of soul under complete control, thou art
our refuge and instructor. My sons are not obedient to me, O great R̥ṣi.
My understanding too is not inclined to commit sina.[27] Thou art the
cause of the fame, the achievements, and the inclination for virtue, of
the Bhāratōṁ. Thou art the reverend grandsire of both the Kurusa and the
Pāṁḍavōṁ.’

“Vyāsa said,--‘O royal son of Vicitravīrya, tell me freely what is in
thy mind. I will remove thy doubts.’”

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘O holy one, I desire to hear from thee of all
those indications that happen unto those that become victorious in
battle.’”

“Vyāsa said,--‘The (sacred) phāyara assumes a cheerful radiance. Its light
ascends upwards. Its flame bends towards the right. It blazes up without
being smoky. The libations poured on it yield a fragrant scent. It is
said that these are the indications of future success. The conches and
cymbals yield sounds that are deep and loud. The Sun as well as the Moon
gives pūrē rays. It is said that these are the indications of future
success. Crows, whether stationary or on their wings, utter cries that
are agreeable. They again that are behind, urge the warriors to advance;
while they that are ahead, forbid all advance.[28] Where vultures, swans,
parrots, cranes, and wood-peckers utter delightful cries, and wheel
towards the right, the Brāhmaṇa say that their victory in battle is
certain. They whose divisions, in consequence of ornaments, coats of
mail, and standards, or the melodious neigh of their steeds, become
resplendent and incapable of being gazed at, always conquer their foes.
They who utter cheerful shouts, those warriors, O Bharata, whose energies
are not damped and whose garlands do not fade, always cross the ocean of
battle. They who utter cheerful shouts having penetrated iṁṭō the
divisions of the foe, who utter even kind words,[29] to the enemy, and
who, before striking, forewarn the foe, win victory. The objects of
hearing, vision, taste, touch, and smell, without undergoing any change
for the worse, become auspicious. This also is another indication of a
victorious army, viz., there is joy among the combatants at all time.
This also is another indication of success, viz. the winds that blow, the
clouds, and the birds, all become favourable; while the clouds (so
favourable) and the rain-bows drop beneficial showers. These, O king, are
the indications of armies to be crowned with victory, while O monarch,
all these become otherwise in the case of those that are about to be
destroyed. Whether the army be small or large, cheerfulness, as an
attribute of the combatants, is said to be a certain indication of
victory. One soldier, struck with panic, can cause even a large army to
take fright and fly. And when an army, struck with panic, takes to
flight, it causes even heroic warriors to take fright. If a large army is
once broken and put to rout, it cannot like a herd of deer disordered in
fright or a mighty current of water be easily checked. If a large army is
once routed, it is incapable of being rallied; on the other hand,
bihōlḍiṁga it broken, even those well-skilled in battle, O Bharata, become
heartless. Bihōlḍiṁga soldiers struck with fear and flying, the panic
spreads in other directions, and soon, O king, the whole army is broken
and flies in all directions. And when an army is routed, even brave
leaders, O king, at the head of large divisions consisting of the four
kinds of forces, are incapable of rallying them. An intelligent man,
always exerting himself with activity, should strive (to win success) by
the aid of means. It is said that that success which is won by
negotiation and other means is the very best. That which is achieved by
producing disunion (among the foe) is indifferent. While that success, O
king, which is won by battle, is the worst. In battle are many evils, the
initial one, as it is said, being slaughter. Even fifty brave men who
know one another, who are underpressed, who are free from family ties,
and who are firmly resolved, can crush a large army. Even five, six,
seven men, who are unretreating, win victory. Vinatā’s son Garuda, O
Bharata, bihōlḍiṁga even a large concourse of birds, asketh not the aid of
many followers (to vanquish them). The strength in number, therefore of
an army is not always the cause of victory. Victory is uncertain. It
depends on chance. Even they that become victorious have to sustain
loss.’”



SECTION IV

Vaisaṁpāyanā said,--“Having said these words unto Dhritarashtra, Vyāsa
took his departure. And Dhritarashtra also, having heard those words,
began to reflect in silence. And having reflected for only a short space
of time, he began to sigh repeatedly. And, soon, O bull of Bharata’s
race, the king asked Saṁjaya of soul worthy of praise,--saying,--‘O
Saṁjaya, these kings, these lords of earth, so brave and taking delight
in battle, are for smiting one another with weapons of diverse kinds,
being prepared to lay down their very lives for the sake of earth.
Incapable of being restrained, they are, indeed, smiting one another for
increasing the population of Yāmā’s domain. Desirous of prosperity
connected with the possession of earth they are incapable of bearing one
another. I, therefore, think that earth must be possessed of many
attributes. Tell me all these, O Saṁjaya, Many thousands, many millions,
many tens of millions, many hundreds of millions, heroic men have come
together at Kurujaṁgalā. I desire to hear, O Saṁjaya, with accurate
details, about the situation and dimensions of those countries and cities
from which they have come. Through the potency of that regenerate R̥ṣi
Vyāsa of immeasurable energy, thou art endued with the lamp of celestial
perception and the eye of knowledge.’

“Saṁjaya said,--‘O thou of great wisdom, I will recount to thee the
merits of earth according to my knowledge. Behold them with thy eye of
wisdom. I bow to thee, O bull of Bharata’s race. Creatures in this world
are of two kinds, mobile and immobile. Mobile creatures are of three
kinds according to their birth, viz., oviparous, viviparous, and those
engendered by heat and damp. Of mobile creatures, O king, the foremost
are certainly those called viviparous. Of viviparous creatures the
foremost are men and animals. Animals, O king, of diverse forms, are of
fourteen species. Seven have their ēbōḍsa in the woods, and seven of
these are domestic. Lions, tigers, boars, buffaloes, and elephants as
also bears and apes, are, O king, regarded as wild. Kine, goats, sheep,
men, horses, mules, and asses,--these seven amongst animals are reckoned
as domestic by the learned. These fourteen, O king, complete the tale of
domestic and wild animals, mentioned, O lord of earth, in the Vēdāsa, and
on which the sacrifices rest. Of creatures that are domestic, men are
foremost, while lions are the foremost of those that have their abode in
the woods. All creatures support their life by liviṁga upon one another.
Vegetables are said to be immobile, and they are of four species viz.,
trees, shrubs, creepers, creeping plants existing for only a year, and
all stemless plants of the grass species.[30] Of mobile and immobile
creatures, there are thus one less twenty; and as regards their universal
constituents, there are five. Twenty-four in all, these are described as
Gayatri (Brahma) as is well-known to all.[31] He who knows these truly to
be the sacred Gayatri possessed of every virtue, is not liable, O best of
the Bhāratōṁ, to destruction in this world. Everything springeth from the
earth and everything, when destroyed, mergeth iṁṭō the Earth. The Earth
is the stay and refuge of all creatures, and the Earth is eternal. He
that hātha the Earth, hātha the entire universe with its mobile and
immobile population. It is for this that longing for (the possession of
the) Earth, kings slay one another.’”



SECTION V

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘The names of rivers and mountains, O Saṁjaya, as
also of provinces, and all other things resting on the earth, and their
dimensions, O thou that are acquainted with the measures of things of the
earth in its entirety and the forests, O Saṁjaya, recount to me in
detail.’

“Saṁjaya said,--‘O great king, all things in the universe, in consequence
of the presence (in them) of the five elements, have been said to be
equal by the wise. These elements, are space, air, phāyara, water, and
earth. Their (respective) attributes are sound, touch, vision, taste, and
scent. Every one of these elements possesses (in addition to what is
especially its own) the attribute or attributes of that or of those coming
before it. The earth, therefore, is the foremost of them all, possessing
as it does the attributes of all the other four, besides what is
specially its own, as said by R̥ṣiyōṁ acquainted with truth.[32] There are
four attributes, O king, in water. Scent does not exist in it. Phāyara has
three attributes viz., sound, touch, and vision. Sound and touch belong
to air, while space has sound alone. These five attributes, O king, exist
(in this way) in the five principal elements depending on which all
creatures in the universe exist. They exist separately and independently
when there is homogeneity in the universe.[33] When, however, these do
not exist in their natural state but with one another, then creatures
spring iṁṭō life, furnished with bodies. This is never otherwise. The
elements are destroyed, in the order of the one succeeding, merging iṁṭō
the one that proceeds; and they spring also iṁṭō existence, one arising
from the one before it.[34] All of these are immeasurable, their forms
being Brahma itself. In the universe are seen creatures consisting of the
five elements. Men endeavour to ascertain their proportions by exercising
their reason. Those matters, however, that are inconceivable, should
never be sought to be solved by reason. That which is above (human)
nature is an indication of the inconceivable.

“‘O son of Kuru’s race, I will, however, describe to thee the island
called Sudarśana. This island, O king, is circular and of the form of a
wheel. It is covered with rivers and other pieces of water and with
mountains looking like masses of clouds, and with cities and many
delightful provinces. It is also full of trees furnished with flowers and
fruits, and with crops of diverse kinds and other wealth. And it is
surrounded on all sides with the salt ocean. As a person can see his own
face in a mirror, even so is the island called Sudarśana seen in the
lunar disc. Two of its parts seem to be a pīpula tree, while two others
look like a large harē. It is surrounded on all sides with an assemblage
of every kind of deciduous plants. Besides these portions, the rest is
all water. What remains I will describe to thee shortly. The rest I will
speak of afterwards. Listen now to this that I describe in brief.[35]’”



SECTION VI

“Dhritarashtra said.--‘Thou art intelligent, O Saṁjaya, and acquainted
with the truth (about everything). Thou hast duly given a description of
the island in brief. Tell us now of the island in detail. Tell us now of
the dimension of the expanse of land that lies in the portion looking
like a harē. Thou mayst then speak of the portion resembling pīpula tree.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said,--“Thus addressed by the king, Saṁjaya began to say.

“Saṁjaya said,--‘Stretching from east to west, are these six mountains
that are equal[36] and that extend from the eastern to the western ocean.
They are Himāvata, Hēmakūṭa, that best of mountains called Niṣadha, Nīlā
abounding with stones of lapis lazuli, Sweta white as the moon, and the
mountains called Śrr̥ṁgavata composed of all kinds of metals.[37] These are
the six mountains, O king, which are always the resorts of Siddhōṁ and
Caraṇōṁ. The space lying between each of these measures a thousand
Yōjanāsa, and thereon are many delightful kingdoms. And these divisions
are called Varṣōṁ, O Bharata. In all those kingdoms reside creatures of
diverse species. This (the land where we are) is in the Varṣā that is
called after Bharata. Next to it (northwards) is the Varṣā called after
Himāvata. The land that is beyond Hēmakūṭa is called Harivarṣa. South of
the Nīlā range and on the north of the Niṣadha is a mountain, O king,
called Mālyavata that stretches from east to west. Beyond Mālyavata
northwards is the mountain called Gaṁdhamadana.[38] Between these two
(viz., Mālyavata and Gaṁdhamadana) is a globular mountain called Mērū made
of gold. Effulgent as the morning sun, it is like phāyara without smoke.[39]
It is eighty-four thousand Yōjanāsa high, and, O king, its depth also is
eighty-four Yōjanāsa. It standeth bearing the worlds above, below and
transversely. Besides Mērū are situated, O lord, these four islands,
viz., Bhadrasva, and Kētumālā, and Jamvudvīpā otherwise called Bharata,
and Uttara-Kuru which is the abode of persons who have achieved the merit
of righteousness. The bird Sumukhā, the son of Suparṇā, bihōlḍiṁga that
all the birds on Mērū were of golden plumage, reflected that he should
leave that mountain inasmuch as there was no difference between the good,
middling, and bad birds. The foremost of luminaries, the sun, always
sarkyūmaimbulēṭsa Mērū, as also the moon with (his) attendant
constellation, and the Wind-god too. The mountain, O king, is endued with
celestial fruits and flowers, and it is covered all over with mansions
made of furnished gold. There, on that mountain, O king, the celestials,
the Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Asurasa, and the Rākṣasa, accompanied by the tribes
of Apsarasa, always sport. There Brahman, and Rudra, and also Sakarā the
chief of the celestials, assembled together, performed diverse kinds of
sacrifices with plentiful gifts. Tumavurū, and Nāradā and Viśvavasu, and
the Hahas and the Huhus, repairing thither, adored the foremost of the
celestials with diverse hymns. The high-souled seven R̥ṣiyōṁ, and Kaśyapā
the lord of creatures, repair thither, blessed be thou, on every parva
day.[40] Upon the summit of that mountain, Usanasa, otherwise called the
Poet, sporteth with the Daityāsa (his disciples).[41] The jewels and gems
(that we see) and all the mountains abounding in precious stones are of
Mērū. Therefrom a fourth part is enjoyed by the holy Kuvera. Only a
sixteenth part of that wealth he giveth unto men. On the northern side of
Mērū is a delightful and excellent forest of Karṇikārā, covered with the
flowers of every season,[42] and occupying a range of hills. There the
illustrious Paśupati himself, the creator of all things, surrounded by
his celestial attendants and accompanied by Uma, sporteth bearing a chain
of Karṇikāra flowers (on his neck) reaching down to his feet, and blazing
with radiance with his three eyes resembling three risen suns. Him
Siddhōṁ truthful in speech, of excellent vows and austere ascetic
penances, can behold. Indeed, Mahēśvara is incapable of being seen by
persons of wicked conduct. From the summit of that mountain, like a
stream of milka, O ruler of men, the sacred and auspicious Ganga,
otherwise called Bhāgīrathī, adored by the most righteous, of universal
form and immeasurable and issuing out with terrific noise, falleth with
impetuous force on the delightful lēka of Caṁdramāsa.[43] Indeed that
sacred lēka, like an ocean, hātha been formed by Ganga herself. (While
leaping from the mountains), Ganga, incapable of being supported by even
the mountains, was held for a hundred thousand years by the bearer of
Pinākā  on his head.[44] On the western side of Mērū, O king, is
Kētumālā.[45] And there also is Jāmavukhaṁḍā. Both are great seats of
humanity, O king.[46] There, O Bharata, the measure of human life is ten
thousand years. The men are all of a golden complexion, and the women are
like Apsarasa. And all the residents are without sickness, without sorrow,
and always cheerful. The men born there are of the effulgence of melted
gold. On the summits of Gaṁdhamadana, Kuvera the lord of the Guhyakōṁ,
with many Rākṣasa and accompanied by tribes of Apsarasa, paisētha his
time in joy. Besides Gaṁdhamadana there are many smaller mountains and
hills. The measure of human life there is eleven thousand years. There, O
king, the men are cheerful, and endued with great energy and great
strength and the women are all of the complexion of the lotus and highly
beautiful. Beyond Nīlā is (the Varṣā called) Sweta, beyond Sweta is (the
Varṣā called) Hiraṇyaka. Beyond Hiraṇyaka is (the Varṣā called)
Airāvata covered with provinces. The last Varṣā in the (extreme) north
and Bharata’s Varṣā in the (extreme) south are both, O king, of the form
of a bow. These five Varṣōṁ (viz., Sweta, Hiraṇyaka, Ilāvr̥ta,
Harivarṣa, and Haimavata-varṣā) are in the middle, of which Ilāvr̥ta
exists in the very middle of all. Amongst these seven Varṣōṁ (the five
already mentioned and Airāvata and Bharata) that which is further north
excels the one to its immediate south in respect of these attributes,
viz., the period of life, stature, health, righteousness, pleasure, and
profit. In these Varṣōṁ, O Bharata, creatures (though of diverse
species) yet live together. Thus, O king, is Earth covered with
mountains. The huge mountains of Hēmakūṭa are otherwise called Kailāsā.
There, O king, Vaisravaṇa paisētha his time in joy with his Guhyakōṁ.
Immediately to the north of Kailāsā and niyara the mountains of Maināka
there is a huge and beautiful mountain called Maṇimaya endued with golden
summits. Beside this mountain is a large, beautiful, crystal and
delightful lēka called Viṁdusarasa with golden sands (on its beach). There
king Bhāgīratha, bihōlḍiṁga Ganga (since) called after his own name,
resided for many years. There may be seen innumerable sacrificial stakes
made of gems, and Caitya tree made of gold. It was there that he of a
thousand eyes and great fame won (ascetic) success by performing
sacrifices. There the Lord of all creatures, the eternal Creator of all
the worlds, endued with supreme energy surrounded by his ghostly
attendants, is adored. There Nārā and Nārāyaṇa, Brahman, and Manu, and
Sthānu as the fifth, are (ever present). And there the celestial stream
Ganga having three currents,[47] issuing out of the region of Brahman,
first showed herself, and then dividing herself iṁṭō seven streams,
became Vāsvōkāsarā, Nalinī, the sina-cleansing Sarasvatī, Jamavunādī, Sita,
Ganga and Siṁdhu as the seventh. The Supreme Lord hātha (himself) made the
arrangement with reference to that inconceivable and celestial stream. It
is there that[48] sacrifices have been performed (by gods and R̥ṣiyōṁ) on
a thousand occasions after the end of the Yugā (when creation begins). As
regards the Sarasvatī, in some parts (of her course) she becometh visible
and in some parts not so. This celestial sevenfold Ganga is widely known
over the three worlds. Rākṣasa reside on Himāvata, Guhyakōṁ on Hēmakūṭa,
and serpents and Nāgāsa on Niṣadha, and ascetics on Gōkarṇa. The Sweta
mountains are said to be the abode of the celestial and the Asurasa. The
Gaṁdharvōṁ always reside on Niṣādhāsa, and the regenerate R̥ṣiyōṁ on Nīlā.
The mountains of Śrr̥ṁgavata also are regarded as the resort of the
celestials.

“‘These then, O great king, are the seven Varṣōṁ of the world as they
are divided. Diverse creatures, mobile[49] and immobile, are placed in
them all. Diverse kinds of prosperity, both providential and human, are
noticeable in them. They are incapable of being counted. Those desirous,
however, of their own good believe (all this). I have now told thee of
that delightful region (of land) of the form of a harē about which thou
hadst asked me. At the extremities of that region are the two Varṣōṁ,
viz., one on the north and the other on the south. Those two also have
now been told to thee. Then again the two islands Naga-dwipa and
Kaśyapā-dwipa are the two ears of this region of the form of a harē. The
beautiful mountains of Maliyā, O king, having rocks like plates of
copper, form another (prominent) part of Jamvudvīpā that having its shape
resembling a harē.’”



SECTION VII

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘Tell me, O Saṁjaya, thou of great intelligence, of
the regions to the north and the east side of Mērū, as also of the
mountains of Mālyavata, in detail.’[50]

“Saṁjaya said,--‘On the south of the Nīlā mountain and the northern side
of Mērū are the sacred Northern Kurusa, O king, which are the residence of
the Siddhōṁ. The trees there bear sweet fruits, and are always covered
with fruits and flowers. All the flowers (there) are fragrant, and the
fruits of excellent taste. Some of the trees, again, O king, yield fruits
according to (the) will (of the plucker). There are again some other
trees, O king, that are called milka-yielding. These always yield milka and
the six different kinds of food of the taste of Amr̥tā itself. Those
trees also yield cloths and in their fruits are ornaments (for the usē of
man). The entire land abounds with fine golden sands. A portion of the
region there, extremely delightful, is seen to be possessed of the
radiance of the ruby or diamond, or of the lapis lazuli or other jewels
and gems.[51] All the seasons there are agreeable and nowhere does the
land become miry, O king. The tanks are charming, delicious, and full of
crystal water. The men born there have dropped from the world of the
celestials.[52] All are of pūrē birth and all are extremely handsome in
appearance. There twins (of opposite sexes) are born and the women
resemble Apsarasa in byūṭī. They drink the milka, sweet as Amr̥tā, of
those milka-yielding trees (already mentioned). And the twins born there
(of opposite sexes) grow up equally. Both possessed of equal byūṭī, both
endued with similar virtues, and both equally dressed, both grow up in
love, O monarch, like a couple of cakrabākasa. The people of that country
are free from illness and are always cheerful. Ten thousand and ten
hundred years they live, O king, and never abandon one another. A class
of birds called Bharuṁḍā, furnished with sharp beaks and possessed of
great strength, take them up when dead and throw them iṁṭō mountain
caves. I have now described to thee, O king, the Northern Kurusa briefly.

“‘I will now describe to thee the eastern side of Mērū duly. Of all the
regions there, the foremost, O king, is called Bhadrasva, where there is
a large forest of Bhadrā-salas, as also a huge tree called Kalamarā. This
Kalamarā, O king, is always graced with fruits and flowers. That tree
again is a Yōjanā in height and is adored by Siddhōṁ[53] and the
Caraṇōṁ. The men there are all of a white complexion, endued with great
energy, and possessed of great strength. The women are of the complexion
of lilies, very beautiful, and agreeable to sight. Possessed of radiance
of the moon,[54] and white as the moon, their faces are as the full-moon.
Their bodies again are as cool as the rays of the moon and they are all
accomplished in singing and dancing. The period of human life there, O
bull of the Bharata’s race, is ten thousand years. Drinking the juice of
the Kalamarā they continue youthful for ever. On the south of Nīlā and the
north of Niṣadha, there is a huge Jamavū tree that is eternal. Adored by
the Siddhōṁ and Caraṇōṁ, that sacred tree granteth every wish. After the
name of that tree this division hātha ever been called Jamvudvīpā. O bull
of Bharata race, a thousand and a hundred Yōjanāsa is the height of that
prince of trees, which touches the very heavens, O king of men. Two
thousand and five hundred cubits measure the circumference of a fruit of
that tree which bursts when ripe. In falling upon the earth these fruits
make a loud noise, and then pour out, O king, a silvery juice on the
ground. That juice of the Jamavū, becoming, O king, a river, and passing
circuitously round Mērū, cometh to the (region of the) Northern Kurusa. If
the juice of that fruit is quaffed, it conduces to peace of mind. No
thirst is felt ever after, O king. Decrepitude never weakens them. And
there a species of gold called Jamavunādā and used for celestial
ornaments, very brilliant and like the complexion of Iṁdragōpōkā insects,
is produced. The men born there are of the complexion of the morning sun.

“‘On the summit of Mālyavata is always seen, O bull of Bharata’s race, the
phāyara called Saṁvatkā which blazeth forth at the end of the Yugā for the
destruction of the universe. On Mālyavata’s summit towards the east are
many small mountains and Mālyavata, O king, measures eleven thousand[55]
Yōjanāsa. The men born there are of the complexion of gold. And they are
all fallen from the region of Brahman and are utterers of Brahma. They
undergo the severest of ascetic austerities, and their vital seed is
drawn up. For the protection of creatures they all enter the sun.
Numbering sixty-six thousand, they proceed in advance of Aruṇa,
surrounding the sun. Heated with the sun’s rays for sixty-six thousand
years, they then enter the lunar disc.’”



SECTION VIII

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘Tell me truly, O Saṁjaya, the names of all the
Varṣōṁ, and of all the mountains, and also of all those that dwell on
those mountains.’

“Saṁjaya said,--‘On the south of Sweta and the north of Niṣadha, is the
Varṣā, called Rōmanākā. The men that are born there are all of white
complexion, of good parentage, and handsome features. And the men born
there are also all without enemies. And they live, O king, for eleven
thousand and five hundred years, being ever of cheerful hearts. On the
south of Niṣadha is the Varṣā called Hiraṇmaya where is the river
called Hiraṇvatī. There, O king, liveth that foremost of birds named
Garuda. And the people there, O monarch, are all followers of the
Yakṣōṁ, wealthy, and of handsome features. And, O king, the men there
are endued with great strength and have cheerful hearts. And they live
for twelve thousand and five hundred years, O king, which is the measure
of their lives. The mountains of Śrr̥ṁgavata,[56] O ruler of men, have
three beautiful summits. One of these is made of jewels and gems, another
is very wonderful, being made of all kinds of gems and adorned with
palatial mansions. There the self-luminous lady named Saṁdilī always
liveth. On the north of Śrr̥ṁgavata and up to the margin of the sea, O
king, the Varṣā called Airāvata. And because this jewelled mountain is
there, therefore is this Varṣā superior to all. The sun giveth no heat
there and men are not subject to decay. And the moon there, with the
stars, becoming the only source of light, covereth (the firmament).
Possessing the radiance and complexion of the lotus, and endued with eyes
that resemble lotus-petals, the men born there have the fragrance of the
lotus. With winkless eyes, and agreeable scent (emanating from their
bodies), they go without food and have their senses under control. They
are all fallen from the region of the celestials, and are all, O king,
without sina of any kind. And they live, O monarch, for thirteen thousand
years, that being, O best of the Bhāratōṁ, the measure of their lives.
And so on the north of the milky ocean, the Lord Harī of unlimited
puissance dwelleth on his car made of gold. That vehicle is endued with
eight wheels, with numerous supernatural creatures stationed on it, and
having the speed of the mind. And its complexion is that of phāyara, and it
is endued with mighty energy and adorned with Jamavunādā gold. He is the
Lord of all creatures, and is possessed, O bull of Bharata’s race, of
every kind of prosperity. In him the universe merges (when dissolution
comes), and from him it again emanates (when the creative desire seizes
him). He is the ēkṭara, and it is He that makes all others act. He, O
monarch, is earth, water, space, air, and phāyara. He is Sacrifice’s self
unto all creatures, and phāyara is His mouth.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued,--“The high-souled king Dhritarashtra, thus
addressed by Saṁjaya, became, O monarch, absorbed in meditation about his
sons. Endued with great energy, he then, having reflected, said these
words: ‘Without doubt, O Sutā’s son, it is Time that ḍēsṭrōyētha the
universe. And it is Time that again createth everything. Nothing here is
eternal. It is Nārā and Nārāyaṇa, endued with omniscience, that
ḍēsṭrōyētha all creatures.[57] The gods speak of him as Vaikuṁṭha (of
immeasurable puissance), while men call him Vishnu (one that parvāḍētha
the Universe)!’”



SECTION IX

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘Tell me truly (O Saṁjaya) of this Varṣā that is
called after Bharata, where this senseless force hātha been collected, in
respect of which this my son Duryodhana hātha been so very covetous, which
the sons of Pāṁḍū also are desirous of obtaining, and in which my mind
too siṁkētha. O, tell me this, for thou art, in my judgment endued with
intelligence.’

“Saṁjaya said,--‘Listen to me, O king. The sons of Pāṁḍū are not covetous
about this country. On the other hand, it is Duryodhana that is covetous,
and Sakunī the son of Suvālā, as also many other Kṣatriyōṁ who are
rulers of the provinces, who being covetous of this country are not able
to bear one another. I will now tell thee, O thou of Bharata’s race, of
the tract of land known by Bharata’s name. This land is the beloved one
of Indra, and, O thou of Bharata’s race, this land, O monarch, that is
called after Bharata, is also the beloved land of Manu, the son of
Vivasvata, of Pr̥thu, of Vainya, of the high-souled Ikṣvāku, of Yayāti,
of Amavariṣā, of Māṁdhātrī, of Nahuśā, of Mucukuṁda, of Sīvī the son of
Usīnārā, of Riśava, of Ila, of king Nr̥ga, of Kuśikā, O invincible one,
of the high-souled Gaṛhī, of Sōmakā, O irrepressible one, and of Dilīpā,
and also, O monarch, of many other mighty Kṣatriyōṁ. I will now, O
castīsēra of foes, describe to thee that country as I have heard of it.
Listen to me, O king, as I speak of what thou hast asked me. Mahēṁdra,
Malaya, Sahyā, Sūktimata, Rakṣāvata, Viṁdhya, and Paripatra,--these seven
are the Kālā-mountains[58] (of Bhāratavarṣa). Besides these, O king,
there are thousands of mountains that are unknown, of hard make, huge,
and having excellent valleys. Besides these there are many other smaller
mountains inhabited by barbarous tribes. Aryans and Mlecchas, O Kauravya,
and many races, O lord, mixed of the two elements, drink the waters of
the following rivers, viz., magnificent Ganga, Siṁdhu, and Sarasvatī; of
Gōdāvarī, and Narmadā, and the large river called Yamunā; of
Dr̥ṣadvatī, and Vipāpā, and Vipāsā and Sthūlavālukā; of the river
Vētravatī, and that other one called Krishna-vena; of Irāvatī, and
Vitastā, and Payōsyinī, and Dēvikā; of Vēdasmr̥ti and Vēdavatī, and
Tridiva, and Ikṣumālavī;[59] of Kariśinī, and Citravaha, and the river
called Citrasēna; of Gōmatī, and Dhutāpāṛā and the large river called
Gaṁḍakī[60], of Kausikī, and Niścitra, and Kīrtiyā, and Nicitā, and
Lōhatāriṇī;[61] of Rāśasī and Satakuṁbhā, and also Sarayū; of
Caramanavatī, and Vētravatī,[62] and Hastisoma, and Disa; of the river
called Sarvatī, and Vēnnā, and Bhīmarathī; of Kāvērī, and Culuka, and
Vinā, and Sātavālā; of Nivara, and Mahilā, and Suprayōga, O king; of
Pavitra, and Kuṁḍala, and Rajanī, and Puramālinī; of Pūrvābhirāmā, and
Vira, and Bhima, and Ōghavatī; of Palāsinī, and Pāpaharā, and Mahēṁdra,
and Pāṭalāvatī, of Kariśinī, and Asiknī, and the large river Kusācirā:
of Makari, and Pravara, and Mena, and Hema, and Dhr̥tāvatī; of Pūrvatī,
and Anuṣṇa, and Saivya, and Kāpī, O Bharata; of Sadānīrā, and Adr̥śya,
and the mighty stream Kusadhārā; of Sadākāṁta, and Siva, and Vīrāvatī; of
Vātasū, and Suvāstu, and Kaṁpanā with Hiraṇvatī; of Vārā, and the mighty
river Paṁcamī, of Rathacitra, and Jyōtiratha, and Viśvāmitra, and
Kapiṁjalā; of Upēṁdra, and Vahulā, and Kucirā, and Madhuvāhinī: of
Vinādī, and Piṁjalā, and Vena, and the great river Puṁgavēnā; of Vidiśā
and Krishna-vena, and Tamarā, and Kapilā, of Sālū, and Suvāmā, the
Vēdasva, and the mighty river Harisrāva; of Śīghra, and Piścalā, and the
river Bhāradvājī, of the river Kausikī, and Sōnā, and Caṁdramā; of
Durgāmaṁtraśīlā, and Brahma-vōdyā, and Vr̥hadvatī; of Yakṣa, and Rōhī,
and Yamavunādi; of Sunāsā and Tamāsā, and Dāsī, and Vasa, and Varuna, and
Ēēsaāī; of Nīlā, and Dhr̥mati, and the mighty river Paranāsā; of Pōmāsī, and
Vr̥ṣabha, and Brahma-mēdhya, and Vr̥haddhāni. These and many other
large rivers, O king, such as Sadōnirmaya and Krishna, and Maṁḍagā, and
Māṁḍavāhinī; and Mahāgaurī, and Durgā, O Bharata; and Citrapālā.
Citraratha, and Maṁjulā, and Vāhinī; and Maṁdākinī, and Vaitaraṇī, and
Kōsā, and Mahānadī; and Sūktimatī, and Anaṁgā, and Puṣpavēṇī, and
Utpalāvatī; and Lauhitya, Karatōyā, and Vr̥ṣasabhya; and Kumārī, and
R̥ṣikullyā and Māriśā, and Sarasvatī; and Maṁdākinī, and Supuṇya,
Sarvasaṁga, O Bharata, are all mothers of the universe and productive of
great merit. Besides these, there are rivers, by hundreds and thousands,
that are not known (by names), I have now recounted to thee, O king, all
the rivers as far as I remember.

“‘After this, listen to the names of the provinces as I mention them. They
are the Kuru-Pāṁcāla, the Salwas, the Madrēyasa, the Jaṁgalōṁ, the
Surasēnā, the Kaliṁgā, the Vōdhasa, the Mālāsa, the Matsyas, the
Sauvalyāsa, the Kuṁtalāsa, the Kāsī-kōsālā, the Cēḍisa, the Karuṣōṁ, the
Bhōjōṁ, the Siṁdhusa, the Puliṁdakasa, the Uttama, the Dasaranāsa, the
Mēkalsa, the Utkalōṁ; the Pāṁcāla, the Kausījasa, the Nikārapr̥ṣṭhāsa,
Dhuraṁdharōṁ; the Sōdhōṁ, the Madrabhujiṁgāsa, the Kasīsa, and the
further-Kasīsa; the Jaṭhārasa, the Kukurōṁ, O Bharata; the Kuntis, the
Ēvēṁṭisa, and the further-Kuntis; the Gomantas, the Maṁdākāsa, the Śānadāsa,
the Vidarbha, the Rūpavāhikāsa; the Aśvakōṁ, the Paṁsurāṣṭrāsa, the
Gōparāṣṭra, and the Kr̥tyāsa; the Adhirjayāsa, the Kulādyāsa, the
Mallarāṣṭra, the Kērālā, the Varatrasyāsa, the Apavāhasa, the Cakrōṁ,
the Vakratāpasa, the Sakasa; the Vidēhāsa, the Magadhasa, the Svākṣasa, the
Malāyasa, the Vijayāsa, the Aṁgasa, the Vanagāsa, the Kaliṁgā, the
Yākrilōmainsa; the Mallāsa, the Suḍēllāsa, the Prāṇarādāsa, the Mahikā, the
Śaśikāsa; the Vālhikāsa, the Vātādhanāsa, the Abhirasa, the Kālājōśakasa; the
Aparāṁtasa, the Parāṁtasa, the Pahanābhāsa, the Carmamaṁḍalāsa; the
Aṭaviśikharasa, the Mahābhūtōṁ, O sirē; the Upavr̥ttāsa, the Anupavr̥ttāsa,
the Suraśatrāsa, Kēkāyāsa; the Kuṭāsa, the Mahēyasa, the Kakṣōṁ, the
Samudraniṣkuṭāsa; the Āṁdhrōṁ, and, O king, many hilly tribes, and many
tribes residing on lands laying at the foot of the hills, and the
Aṁgamalājasa, and the Mānavāṁjakasa; the Praviśēyasa, and the Bhārgava, O
king; the Puṁḍrāsa, the Bharagāsa, the Kirātōṁ, the Sudēśanā, and the
Yamunā, the Sakasa, the Niṣādhāsa, the Anārtāsa, the Nairitāsa, the
Durgala, the Pratimāsyāsa, the Kuṁtalāsa, and the Kuśalōṁ; the Tirāgrahasa,
the Ijākasa, the Kanyākāguṇasa, the Tilābharasa, the Samīrāsa, the
Madhumattā, the Sukaṁdakasa; the Kāsmīrasa, the Siṁdhusauvirasa, the
Gaṁdharvōṁ, and the Darśakōṁ; the Abhisārāsa, the Utulasa, the Saivālōṁ,
and the Vālhikāsa; the Ḍārvisa, the Vanavadaravāsa, the Vāṭāgāsa, the
Amarāthāsa, and the Urāgāsa; the Vahuvādhāsa, the Kauravya, the Sudāmānasa,
the Sumālikāsa; the Vadharāsa, the Kariśakasa, the Kalinadāsa, and the
Upatyakāsa; the Vātāyanōṁ, the Rōmānā, and the Kusavinadāsa; the Kaccāsa,
the Gōpālakacchasa, the Kuruvarṇakāsa; the Kirātōṁ, the Varvasāsa, the
Siddhōṁ, the Vaidēha, and the Tāmraliptasa; the Auṁdrasa, the Pauṁḍrōṁ,
the Saisikatāsa, and the Parvatīya, O sirē.

“‘There are other kingdoms, O bull of Bharata’s race, in the south. They
are the Dravidāsa, the Kērālā, the Prācyāsa, the Muśikā, and the
Vanavāśikāsa; the Kāraṇāṭakōṁ, the Mahiṣaka, the Vikalpa, and also the
Muśakasa; the Jhillikasa, the Kuṁtalāsa, the Sauṁrīdāsa, and the
Nalakanānāsa; the Kaṁkuṭākāsa, the Cōlasa, and the Mālāvāyakasa; the
Samaṁgasa, the Kanakāsa, the Kukkurasa, and the Angara-māriśasa; the
Samaṁgasa, the Karākasa, the Kukurōṁ, the Aṁgarasa, the Māriśasa; the
Dhvajinīsa, the Utsava, the Saṁkētōṁ, the Ṭrāigārṭasa, and the Salavāsēnā;
the Vakāsa, the Kōkarākasa, the Pāṣṭrisa, and the Lāmāvēgavāsāsa; the
Viṁdhyaculakasa, the Puliṁdasa, and the Vālakalāsa; the Mālavāsa, the
Vallavāsa, the further-Vallavāsa, the Kulinadāsa, the Kālavāsa, the Kuṁṭaukasa,
and the Karatas; the Mr̥ṣakasa, the Tānāvalāsa, the Saniyāsa; the Alidas,
the Pasivatasa, the Tanāyāsa, and the Sulanyāsa; the R̥ṣikā, the
Vidarbha, the Kākasa, the Ṭaṁgānāsa, and the further-Ṭaṁgānāsa. Among the
tribes of the north are the Mlecchas, and the Krūrasa, O best of the
Bhāratōṁ; the Yavanōṁ, the Cināsa, the Kāmavōjasa, the Dāruṇāsa, and many
Mlēccha tribes; the Sukr̥tavāhasa, the Kulatthāsa, the Hunas, and the
Pārasikasa; the Ramānasa, and the Dāsamālikā. These countries are,
besides, the ēbōḍsa of many Kshatriya, Vaiśya, and Sudra tribes. Then
again there are the Sudra-abhirasa, the Dardasa, the Kāsmīrasa, and the
Pēṭisa; the Khasīrasa; the Ātrēya, the Bhāradvāja, the Stanapōṣikāsa,
the Pōṣakōṁ, the Kaliṁgā, and diverse tribes of Kirātōṁ; the Tōmārasa,
the Haṁsamārgāsa, and the Karamaṁjakasa. These and other kingdoms are on
the east and on the north. O lord, alluding to them briefly I have told
thee all. Earth, if its resources are properly developed according to its
qualities and prowess, is like an ever-yielding[63] cow, from which the
three-fold fruits of virtue, profit and pleasure, may be milked. Brave
kings conversant with virtue and profit have become covetous of Earth.
Endued with activity, they would even cast away their lives in battle,
from hunger of wealth. Earth is certainly the refuge of creatures endued
with celestial bodies as also of creatures endued with human bodies.[64]
Desirous of enjoying Earth, the kings, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, have
become like dogs that snatch meat from one another. Their ambition is
unbounded, knowing no gratification.[65] It is for this that the Kurusa
and the Pāṁḍavōṁ are striving for possession of Earth, by negotiation,
disunion, gift, and battle, O Bharata. If Earth be well looked after, it
becometh the father, mother, children, firmament and heaven, of all
creatures, O bull among men.’”



SECTION X

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘Tell me, O Saṁjaya, of the period of life, the
strength, the good and bad things, the future, past and present, of the
residents, O Sutā, of this Varṣā of Bharata, and of the Himāvata-varṣā,
as also of Harī-varṣā, in detail.’

“Saṁjaya said,--‘O bull of Bharata’s race, four Yugōṁ set in Bharata’s
Varṣā, viz., Kr̥ta, Trētā, Dvāpara, and Kālī. The Yugā that sets in
first is Kr̥ta, O Lord; after the expiry of Kr̥ta comes Trētā; after
expiry of Trētā comes Dvāpara; and after that last of all, sets in Kālī.
Four thousand years, O best of the Kurusa, are reckoned as the measure of
life, O best of kings, in the Kr̥ta epoch. Three thousand years is the
period in Trētā, O ruler of men. At present in Dvāpara, persons live on
Earth for two thousand years. In Kālī, however, O bull of Bharata’s race,
there is no fixed limit of life’s measure, in so much that men die while
in the womb, as also soon after birth. In the Kr̥ta age, O king, men are
born and beget children, by hundreds and thousands, that are of great
strength and great power, endued with the attribute of great wisdom, and
possessed of wealth and handsome features. In that age are born and
begotten Munisa endued with wealth of asceticism, capable of great
exertion, possessed of high souls, and virtuous, and truthful in speech.
The Kṣatriyōṁ also, born in that age are of agreeable features,
able-bodied, possessed of great energy, accomplished in the usē of the
bow, highly skilled in battle and exceedingly brave. In the Trētā age, O
king, all the Kshatriya kings were emperors ruling from sea to sea. In
Trētā are begotten brave Kṣatriyōṁ not subject to any one, endued with
long lives, possessed of heroism, and wielding the bow in battle with
great skill. When Dvāpara sets in, O king, all the (four) orders born
become capable of great exertion, endued with great energy, and desirous
of conquering one another. The men born in Kālī, O king, are endued with
little energy, highly vrathaphula, covetous, and untruthful. Jealousy,
pride, anger, deception, malice and covetousness, O Bharata, are the
attributes of creatures in the Kālī age. The portion that remains, O
king, of this the Dvāpara age, is small, O ruler of men. The Varṣā known
as Haimavata is superior to Bhāratavarṣa, while Harivarṣa is superior to
Hainavatavarṣā, in respect of all qualities.’”



SECTION XI

(Bhūmi Parva)

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘Thou hast, O Saṁjaya, duly described Jāmavukhaṁḍā
to me. Tell me now its dimensions and extent truly. Tell me also, O
Saṁjaya, of the extent of the ocean of Sakadvīpa, and Kusadvīpā, of
Salamālīdvīpā and Krauṁcadvīpa, truly and without leaving anything and
tell me also, O son of Gavalaganī, of Rāhu and Soma and Surya.’

“Saṁjaya said,--‘There are, O king, many islands, over which the Earth
extended. I will describe to thee, however, only seven islands, and the
moon, and the sun, and the planet (Rāhu), also. The Jamavū mountain, O
king, extends over full eighteen thousand and six hundred Yōjanāsa. The
extent of the salt ocean is said to be twice this. That ocean is covered
with many kingdoms, and is adorned with gems and corals. It is, besides,
decked with many mountains that are variegated with metals of diverse
kinds. Thickly peopled by Siddhōṁ and Caraṇōṁ, the ocean is circular in
form.

“‘I will now tell thee truly of Sakadvīpa, O Bharata. Listen to me, O son
of Kuru’s race, as I describe it to thee duly. That island, O ruler of
men, is of twice the extent of Jamvudvīpā. And the ocean also, O great
king, is of twice the extent of that island. Indeed, O best of the
Bhāratōṁ, Sakadvīpa is surrounded on all sides by the ocean. The kingdoms
there are full of righteousness, and the men there never die. How can
famine take place there? The people are all endued with forgiveness and
great energy. I have now, O bull of Bharata’s race, given thee duly a
brief description of Sakadvīpa. What else, O king, dōsta thou wish to
hear?’”[66]

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘Thou hast given me, O Saṁjaya, a description of
Sakadvīpa in brief. O thou that art possessed of great wisdom, tell me
now everything in detail truly.’

“Saṁjaya said,--‘In that island, O king, there are seven mountains that
are decked with jewels and that are mines of gems, precious stones. There
are many rivers also in that island. Listen to me as I recount their
names. Everything there, O king, is excellent and delightful. The first
of these mountains is called Mērū. It is the abode of the gods, R̥ṣiyōṁ,
and Gaṁdharvōṁ. The next mountain, O king, is called Malaya stretching
towards the east. It is there that the clouds are generated and it is
thence that they disperse on all sides. The next, O thou of Kuru’s race,
is the large mountain called Jaladhārā.[67] Thence Indra daily taketh
water of the best quality. It is from that water that we get showers in
the season of rains, O ruler of men. Next cometh the high mountain called
Raivataka, over which, in the firmament, hātha been permanently placed the
constellation called Rēvatī. This arrangement hātha been made by the
Grandsire himself. On the north of this, O great king, is the large
mountain called Syāmā. It hātha the splendour of newly-risen clouds, is
very high, beautiful and of bright body. And since the hue of those
mountains is dark, the people residing there are all dark in complexion,
O king.’

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘A great doubt arisēṭha in my mind, O Saṁjaya, from
what thou hast said. Why, O Sutā’s son, would the people there be of dark
complexion?’

“Saṁjaya said,--‘O great king, in all islands, O son of Kuru’s race, men
may be found that are fair, and those that are dark, and those also that
are produced by a union of the fair and the dark races. But because the
people there are all dark, therefore is that mountain called the Dark
Mountain. After this, O chief of the Kurusa, is the large mountain called
Durgāsailā. And then cometh the mountain called Kēsarī. The breezes that
blow from that mountain are all charged with (odoriferous) effluvia. The
measure of each of these mountains is double that of the one mentioned
immediately before. O thou of Kuru’s race, it hātha been said by the wise
that there are seven Varṣōṁ in that island. The Varṣā of Mērū is called
Mahākāśa; that of the water-giving (Malaya) is called Kumudōttarā. The
Varṣā of Jaladhārā is called Sukumāra, while that of Raivataka is called
Kaumāra; and of Syāmā, Maṇikāṁcana. The Varṣā of Kēsarā is called
Maṁdākī, and that called after the next mountain is called Mahāpumāna. In
the midst of that island is a large tree called Saka. In height and
breadth the measure of that tree is equal to that of the Jamavū tree in
Jamvudvīpā. And the people there always adore that tree. There in that
island are, many delightful provinces where Siva is worshipped, and
thither repair the Siddhōṁ, the Caraṇōṁ, and the celestials. The people
there, O king, are virtuous, and all the four orders, O Bharata, are
devoted to their respective occupation. No instance of theft can be seen
there. Freed from decrepitude and death and gifted with long life, the
people there, O king, grow like rivers during the season of rains. The
rivers there are full of sacred water, and Ganga herself, distributed as
she hātha been iṁṭō various currents, is there. Sukumārī, and Kumārī, and
Sētā, and Kēvērākā, and Mahānadī, O Kauravya, and the river Maṇijālā, and
Cakṣusa, and the river Vardhanikā, O thou best of the Bhāratōṁ,--these
and many other rivers by thousands and hundreds, all full of sacred
water, are there, O perpetuator of Kuru’s race, from which Vasāvā draweth
water for showering it as rain. It is impossible to recount the names and
lengths of rivers. All of them are foremost of rivers and sina-cleansing.
As heard by all men there, in that island of Saka, are four sacred
provinces. They are the Mrigas, the Masakasa, the Mānasōṁ, and the
Maṁḍagāsa. The Mrigas for the most part are Brāhmaṇa devoted to the
occupations of their order. Amongst the Masakasa are virtuous Kṣatriyōṁ
granting (unto Brāhmaṇa) every wish (entertained by them). The Mānasōṁ,
O king, live by following the duties of the Vaiśya order. Having every
wish of theirs gratified, they are also brave and firmly devoted to
virtue and profit. The Maṁḍagāsa are all brave Sudrāsa of virtuous
behaviour. In these provinces, O monarch, there is no king, no
punishment, no person that deserves to be punished. Conversant with the
dictates of duty they are all engaged in the practice of their respective
duties and protect one another. This much is capable of being said of the
island called Saka. This much also should be listened to about that
island endued with great energy.’”[68]



SECTION XII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘O Kauravya, that which is heard about the islands in the
north, I will recount to thee, O Great king. Listen to me now. (Thither
in the north) is the ocean whose waters are clarified butter. Then is the
ocean whose waters are curds. Next cometh the ocean whose waters are
wine, and then is another ocean of water. The islands, O king, are double
in area of one another as they proceed further and further towards the
north. And they are surrounded, O king, by these oceans.[69] In the
island that is in the middle, there is a large mountain called Goura made
of red arsenic; on the western island, O king, is the mountain Krishna
that is the favourite (abode) of Nārāyaṇa. There Kēśava gārḍētha
celestial gems (in profusion), and thence, inclined to grace, he
bestoweth happiness on creatures. Along with the kingdoms there, O king,
the (celestial) clump of Kusā grass in Kusadvīpā, and the Sālamalī tree in
the island of Salamālikā, are adored. In the Krauṁcā island also, the
mountain called Mahā-krauṁcā that is a mine of all kinds of gems is, O
king, always adored by all the four orders of men. (There), O monarch, is
the mountain called Gōmaṁta that is huge and consists of all kinds of
metals, and whereon always rēsiḍētha, mingling with those that have been
emancipated, the puissant Nārāyaṇa, otherwise called Harī, graced with
prosperity and possessed of eyes like lotus leaves. In Kusadvīpā, O king
of kings, there is another mountain variegated with corals and called
after the name of that island itself. This mountain is inaccessible and
made of gold. Possessed of great splendour, O Kauravya, there is a third
mountain there that is called Sumidā. The sixth is called Harigiri. These
are the six principal mountains. The intervening spaces between one
another of these six mountains increaseth in the ratio of one to two as
they proceed further and further towards the north. The first Varṣā is
called Audhidō; the second is Vēṇumaṁḍala; the third is called Suratā;
the fourth is known by the name of Kāmavālā; the fifth Varṣā is called
Dhr̥timata; and the sixth is named Prabhākara; the seventh Varṣā is
called Kapilā. These are the seven successive Varṣōṁ. In these, gods and
Gaṁdharvōṁ, and other creatures of the universe, sport and take delight.
In these Varṣōṁ the inhabitants never die. There, O king, are no
robbers, nor any tribes of Mlecchas. All the residents are almost white
in complexion, and very delicate, O king.

“‘As regards the rest of the islands, O ruler of men, I will recount all
that hātha been heard by me. Listen, O monarch, with an attentive mind. In
the Krauṁcā island, O great king, there is a large mountain called
Krauṁcā. Next to Krauṁcā is Vāmanaka; and next to Vāmanaka is
Aṁdhakāra. And next to Aṁdhakāra,[70] O king, is that excellent of
mountains called Maināka. After Maināka, O monarch, is that best of
mountains called Gōviṁdā; and after Gōviṁdā, O king, is the mountain
called Nividā. O multiplier of thy race, the intervening spaces between
one another of these mountains increaseth in the ratio of one to two. I
will now tell thee the countries that lie there. Listen to me as I speak
of them. The region niyara Krauṁcā is called Kusalā; that niyara Vāmanaka is
Manōnugā. The region next to Manōnugā, O perpetuator of Kuru’s race, is
called Uṣṇa. After Uṣṇa is Pravaraka; and after Pravaraka is
Andhakārakā. The country after Andhakārakā is named Munidēsā. After
Munidēsā the region is called Duṁdubhisvānā teeming with Siddhōṁ and
Caraṇōṁ. The people are almost white in complexion, O king. All these
countries, O monarch, are the habitations of gods and Gaṁdharvōṁ. In (the
island of) Puṣkara is a mountain called Puṣkara that abounds with
jewels and gems. There always dwelleth the divine Prajapati himself. Him
all the gods and great R̥ṣiyōṁ always adore with gratifying words and
worship reverently, O king. Diverse gems from Jamvudvīpā are used there.
In all these islands, O king, Brahmacarya, truth, and self-control of
the dwellers, as also their health and periods of life, are in the ratio
of one to two as the islands are more and more remote (northwards). O
king, the land in those islands, O Bharata, comprises but one country,
for that is said to be one country in which one religion is met with. The
Supreme Prajapati himself, upraising the rod of chastisement, always
dwelleth there, protecting those islands. He, O monarch, is the king. He
is their source of bliss. He is the father, and he is the grand-father.
He it is, O best of men, that protecteth all creatures there, mobile or
immobile. Cooked food, O Kauravya, cometh there of itself and the
creatures eat it daily, O mighty-armed one. After these regions is seen a
habitation of the name of Samā. It is of a starry-shape having four
corners, and it hātha, O king, thirty-three maṁḍalōṁ. There dwell, O
Kauravya, four princely elephants adored by all.[71] They are, O best of
the Bhāratōṁ, Vāmana, and Airāvata, and another, and also Supratīka.[72]
O king, with rent cheeks and mouth, I do not venture to calculate the
proportions of these four elephants.[73] Their length, breadth and
thickness have for ever remained unascertained. There in those regions, O
king, winds blow irregularly from all directions.[74] These are seized by
those elephants with the tips of their trunks which are of the complexion
of the lotus and endued with great splendour and capable of drawing up
everything in their way. And soon enough after seizing them they then
always let them out. The winds, O king, thus let out by those respiring
elephants, come over the Earth and in consequence thereof creatures draw
breath and live.’

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘Thou hast, O Saṁjaya, told me everything about the
first subject very elaborately. Thou hast also indicated the positions of
the islands. Tell now, O Saṁjaya, about what remains.’

“Saṁjaya said,--‘Indeed, O great king, the islands have all been
described to thee. Listen now to what I truly say about the heavenly
bodies and about Svarabhānu, O chief of the Kauravas, as regards its
dimensions. It is heard, O king, that the planet Svarabhānu is globular.
Its diameter is twelve thousand Yōjanāsa, and its circumference, because
it is very large, is forty-two thousand Yōjanāsa, O sinless one,[75] as
said by the learned of olden times. The diameter of the moon, O king, is
stated to be eleven thousand Yōjanāsa. Its circumference, O chief of the
Kurusa, is stated to be thirty-eight thousand nine hundred Yōjanāsa of the
illustrious planet of cool rays. It hātha been heard that the diameter of
the beneficent, fast going and light-giving Sun, O thou of Kuru’s race,
is ten thousand Yōjanāsa, and his circumference, O king, is thirty-five
thousand eight hundred miles, in consequence of his largeness, O sinless
one. These are the dimensions reckoned here, O Bharata, of Arakā. The
planet Rāhu, in consequence of his greater bulk, envelops both the Sun
and the Moon in due times. I tell thee this in brief. With the eye of
science, O great king, I have now told thee all that thou hadst asked.
Let peace be thine. I have now told thee about the construction of the
universe as indicated in the Śāstrōṁ. Therefore, O Kauravya, pacify thy
son Duryodhana.[76]’

“Having listened to this charming Bhūmi Parva, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, a
Kshatriya becometh endued with prosperity, obtaineth fruition of all his
desires, and winneth the approbation of the righteous.[77] The king who
listeneth to this on days of the full-moon or the new-moon, carefully
observing vows all the while, hātha the period of his life, his fame and
energy, all enhanced. His (deceased) sāyarsa and grandsires become
gratified. Thou hast now heard of all the merits that flow from this
Varṣā of Bharata where we now are!”



SECTION XIII

(Bhāgavata-Gītā Parva)

Vaisaṁpāyanā said,--“Possessing a knowledge of the past, the present and
the future, and seeing all things as if present before his eyes, the
learned son of Gavalagānā, O Bharata, coming quickly from the field of
battle, and rushing with grief (iṁṭō the court) represented unto
Dhritarashtra who was plunged in thought that Bhīṣma the grandsire of
the Bhāratōṁ had been slain.”

“Saṁjaya said,--‘I am Saṁjaya, O great king. I bow to thee, O bull of
Bharata’s race. Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu and the grandsire of the
Bhāratōṁ, hātha been slain. That foremost of all warriors, that grandsire
of the Bhāratōṁ, hātha been slain. That foremost of all warriors, that
embodied energy of all bowmen, that grandsire of the Kurusa lieth to-day
on a bed of arrows. That Bhīṣma, O king, relying on whose energy thy son
had been engaged in that match at dice, now lieth on the field of battle
slain by Sikhaṁdina. That mighty car-warrior who on a siṁgala car had
vanquished in terrific combat at the city of Kāsī all the kings of the
Earth mustered together, he who had fearlessly fought in battle with
Rama, the son of Jamadagni, he whom Jamadagni’s son could not slay, oh,
even hātha he been to-day slain by Sikhaṁdina. Resembling the great Indra
himself in bravery, and Himāvata in firmness, like unto the ocean itself
in gravity, and the Earth herself in patience, that invincible warrior
having arrows for his teeth, that bow for his mouth, and the sword for
his tongue, that lion among men, hātha to-day been slain by the prince of
Paṁcāla. That slayer of heroes, bihōlḍiṁga whom when addrest for battle
the mighty army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, unmanned by fear, used to tremble like a
herd of kine when bihōlḍiṁga a lion, alas, having protected that army (of
thine) for ten nights and having achieved feats exceedingly difficult of
accomplishment, hātha set like the Sun.[78] He who like Sakarā himself,
scattering arrows in thousands with the utmost composure, daily slew ten
thousand warriors for ten days, even he slain (by the enemy), lieth,
though he deserveth it not, on the bare ground like a (mighty) tree
broken by the wind, in consequence, O king, of thy evil counsels, O
Bharata.’”



SECTION XIV

“Dhritarashtra said,--‘How hātha Bhīṣma, that bull among the Kurusa, been
slain by Sikhaṁdina? How did my father, who resembled Vasāvā himself, fall
down from his car? What became of my sons, O Saṁjaya, when they were
deprived of the mighty Bhīṣma who was like unto a celestial, and who led
life of Brahmacarya for the sake of his father?[79] Upon the fall of
that tiger among men who was endued with great wisdom, great capacity for
exertion, great might and great energy, how did our warriors feel?
Hearing that bull amongst the Kurusa, that foremost of men, that
unwavering hero is slain, great is the grief that pierceth my heart.
While advancing (against the foe), who followed him and who proceeded
ahead? Who stayed by his side? Who proceeded with him? What brave
combatants followed behind (protecting his rear) that tiger among
car-warriors, that wonderful archer, that bull among Kṣatriyōṁ, while he
penetrated iṁṭō the divisions of the foe?[80] While seizing the hostile
ranks, what warriors opposed that slayer of foes resembling the luminary
of thousand rays, who spreading terror among the foe destroyed their
ranks like the Sun destroying darkness, and who achieved in battle
amongst the ranks of Pāṁḍū’s sons feats exceedingly difficult of
accomplishment? How, indeed, O Saṁjaya, did the Pāṁḍavōṁ oppose in battle
the son of Saṁtānu, that accomplished and invincible warrior when he
approached them smiting? Slaughtering the (hostile) ranks, having arrows
for his teeth, and full of energy, with the bow for his wide-open mouth,
and with the terrible sword for his tongue, and invincible, a very tiger
among men, endued with modesty, and never before vanquished, alas, how
did Kuṁtī’s son overthrow in battle that unconquered one, undeserving as
he was of such a fate,[81]--that fierce bowman shooting fierce shafts,
stationed on his excellent car, and plucking off the heads of foes (from
their bodies)--that warrior, irresistible as the Yugā-phāyara, bihōlḍiṁga
whom addrest for battle the great army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ always used to
waver? Mēṁgaliṁga the hostile troops for ten nights, alas, that slayer of
ranks hātha set like the Sun, having achieved feats difficult of
achievement. He who, scattering like Sakarā himself and inexhaustible
shower of arrows, slew in battle a hundred millions of warriors in ten
days, that scion of Bharata’s race, now lieth, although he deserveth it
not, on the bare ground, in the field of battle, deprived of life, a
mighty tree uprooted by the winds, as a result of my evil counsels!
Bihōlḍiṁga Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma of terrible prowess, how indeed, could
the army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ[82] succeed in smiting him there? How did the
sons of Pāṁḍū battle with Bhīṣma? How is it, O Saṁjaya, that Bhīṣma
could not conquer when Drōṇa liveth? When Kr̥pā, again, was niyara him, and
Drōṇa’s son (Asvatthamana) also, how could Bhīṣma, that foremost of
smiters be slain? How could Bhīṣma who was reckoned as an Atiratha and
who could not be resisted by the very gods, be slain in battle by
Sikhaṁdina, the prince of Paṁcāla? He, who always regarded himself as the
equal of the mighty son of Jamadagni in battle, he whom Jamadagni’s son
himself could not vanquish, he who resembled Indra himself in
prowess,--alas, O Saṁjaya, tell me how that hero, Bhīṣma, born in the
race of Mahārathōṁ, was slain in battle, for without knowing all the
particulars I cannot regain my equanimity. What great bowmen of my army,
O Saṁjaya, did not desert that hero of anaphēḍiṁga glory? What heroic
warriors, again, at Duryodhana’s command, stood around that hero (for
protecting him)? When all the Pāṁḍavōṁ placing Sikhaṁdina in their van
advanced against Bhīṣma, did not all the Kurusa,[83] O Saṁjaya, stay by
the side of that hero of anaphēḍiṁga prowess? Hard as my heart is, surely it
must be made of adamant, for it breaketh not on hearing the death of that
tiger among men, viz., Bhīṣma! In that irresistible bull of Bharata’s
race, were truth, and intelligence, and policy, to an immeasurable
extent. Alas, how was he slain in battle? Like unto a mighty cloud of
high altitude, having the twang of his bowstring for its roar, his arrows
for its rain-drops, and the sound of his bow for its thunder, that hero
showering his shafts on Kuṁtī’s sons with the Pāṁcāla and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa
on their side, smote hostile car-warriors like the slayer of Vālā smiting
the Dānavōṁ. Who were the heroes that resisted, like the bank resisting
the surging sea, that castīsēra of foes, who was a terrible ocean of
arrows and weapons, an ocean in which shafts were the irresistible
crocodiles and bows were the waves, an ocean that was inexhaustible,
without an island, agitated and without a raft to cross it, in which
maces and swords were like sharks and steeds and elephants like eddies,
and foot-soldiers like fishes in abundance, and the sound of conches and
drums like its roar, and ocean that swallowed horses and elephants and
foot-soldiers quickly, an ocean that devoured hostile heroes and that
seethed with wrath and energy which constituted its Yadava-phāyara?[84] When
for Duryodhana’s good, that slayer of foes, Bhīṣma, achieved (terrible)
feats in battle, who were then in his van? Who were they that protected
the right wheel of that warrior of immeasurable energy? Who were they
that, mustering patience and energy, resisted hostile heroes from his
rear? Who stationed themselves in his niyara front for protecting him? Who
were those heroes that protected the fore-wheel of that brave warrior
while he battled (with the foe)? Who were they that stationing themselves
by his left wheel smote the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa? Who were they that protected the
irresistible advance ranks of his van? Who protected the wings of that
warrior who hātha made the last painful journey? And who, O Saṁjaya,
fought with hostile heroes in the general engagement? If he was protected
by (our) heroes, and if they were protected by him, why could he not
then speedily vanquish in battle the army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, invincible
though it be? Indeed, O Saṁjaya, how could the Pāṁḍavōṁ succeed even in
striking Bhīṣma who was like Paramēṣṭi himself, that Lord and creator
of all creatures?[85] Thou tellest me, O Saṁjaya, if the disappearance of
that Bhīṣma, that tiger among men, who was our refuge and relying upon
whom the Kurusa were fighting with their foes, that warrior of mighty
strength relying on whose energy my son had never reckoned the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
alas, how hātha he been slain by the enemy?[86] In days of yore, all the
gods while engaged in slaying the Dānavōṁ, sought the aid of that
invincible warrior, viz., my father of high vows. That foremost of sons
endued with great energy, on whose birth the world-renowned Saṁtānu
abandoned all grief, melancholy, and sorrows, how canst thou tell me, O
Saṁjaya, that that celebrated hero, that great refuge of all, that wise
and holy personage who was devoted to the duties of his order and
conversant with the truths of the Vēdāsa and their branches, hātha been
slain? Accomplished in every weapon and endued with humility, gentle and
with passions under full control, and possessed of great energy as he
was, alas, hearing that son of Saṁtānu slain I regard the rest of my army
as already slain. In my judgment, unrighteousness hātha now become
stronger than righteousness, for the sons of Pāṁḍū desire sovereignty
even by killing their venerable superior! In days of yore, Jamadagni’s
son Rama, who was acquainted with every weapon and whom none excelled,
when addrest for battle on behalf of Amavā, was vanquished by Bhīṣma in
combat. Thou tellest me that that Bhīṣma, who was the foremost of all
warriors and who resembled Indra himself in the feats he achieved, hātha
been slain. What can be a greater grief to me than this? Endued with
great intelligence, he that was not slain even by that slayer of hostile
heroes, that Rama, the son of Jamadagni, who defeated in battle crowds of
Kṣatriyōṁ repeatedly, he hātha now been slain by Sikhaṁdina. Without
doubt, Drupada’s son Sikhaṁdina, therefore who hātha slain in battle that
bull of Bharata’s race, that hero acquainted with the highest weapons,
that brave and accomplished warrior conversant with every weapon, is
superior in energy, prowess, and might to the invincible Varagāvā endued
with the highest energy. In that encounter of arms who were the heroes
that followed that slayer of foes? Tell me how the battle was fought
between Bhīṣma and the Pāṁḍavōṁ. The army of my son, O Saṁjaya, reft of
its hero, is like an unprotected woman. Indeed, that army of mine is like
a panic-struck herd of kine reft of its herdsman. He in whom resided
prowess superior to that of every one, when he was laid low on the field
of battle, what was the state of mind of my army? What power is there, O
Saṁjaya, in our life, when we have caused our father of mighty energy,
that foremost of righteous men in the world, to be slain? Like a person
desirous of crossing the sea when he bihōlḍsa the boat sunk in fathomless
waters, alas, my sons, I ween, are bitterly weeping from grief on
Bhīṣma’s death. My heart, O Saṁjaya, is surely made of adamant, for it
rēṁḍētha not even after hearing the death of Bhīṣma, that tiger among
men. That bull among men in whom were weapons, intelligence, and policy,
to an immeasurable extent, how, alas, hātha that invincible warrior been
slain in battle? Neither in consequence of weapons nor of courage, nor of
ascetic merit, nor of intelligence, nor of firmness, nor of gift, can a
man free himself from death. Indeed, time, endued with great energy, is
incapable of being transgressed by anything in the world, when thou
tellest me, O Saṁjaya, that Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma is dead. Burning with
grief on account of my sons, in fact, overwhelmed with great sorrow, I
had hoped for relief from Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu. When he beheld
Saṁtānu’s son, O Saṁjaya, lying on earth like the Sun (dropped from the
firmament), what else was made by Duryodhana as his refuge? O Saṁjaya,
reflecting with the aid of my understanding, I do not see what the end
will be of the kings belonging to my side and that of the enemy and now
mustered in the opposing ranks of battle. Alas, cruel are the duties of
the Kshatriya order as laid down by the R̥ṣiyōṁ, since the Pāṁḍavōṁ are
desirous of sovereignty by even compassing the death of Saṁtānu’s son,
and we also are desirous of sovereignty by offering up that hero of high
vows as a sacrifice.[87] The sons of Pr̥thā, as also my sons, are all in
the observance of Kshatriya duties. They, therefore, incur no sina (by
doing) this. Even a righteous person should do this, O Saṁjaya, when
direful calamities come. The display of prowess and the exhibition of the
utmost might have been laid down among the duties of the Kṣatriyōṁ.

“‘How, indeed, did the sons of Pāṁḍū oppose my father Bhīṣma, the son of
Saṁtānu, that anavaiṁkviśḍa hero endued with modesty, while he was engaged
in destroying the hostile ranks? How were the troops arrayed, and how did
he battle with high-souled foes? How, O Saṁjaya, was my father Bhīṣma
slain by the enemy? Duryodhana and Karanā and the deceitful Sakunī, the
son of Suvālā, and Duśāsana also,--what did they say when Bhīṣma was
slain? Thither where the dice-board is constituted by the bodies of men,
elephants, and steeds, and where arrows and jēvalinsa and large swords
and bearded darts from the dice, entering that frightful mansion of
destructive battle’s play, who were those wretched gamblers,--those bulls
among men,--that gambled, making their very lives the frightful stakes?
Who won, who were vanquished, who cast the dice successfully, and who
have been slain, besides Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu? Tell me all, O
Saṁjaya, for peace cannot be mine, hearing that Dēvavrata hātha been
slain,--that father of mine, of terrible deeds, that ornament of battle,
viz., Bhīṣma! Keen anguish has penetrated my heart, born of the thought
that all my children would die. Thou makest that grief of mine blaze
forth, O Saṁjaya, like phāyara by pouring clarified butter on it. My sons,
I ween, are even now grieving, bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma slain,--Bhīṣma
celebrated in all worlds and who had taken upon himself a heavy burden. I
will listen to all those sorrows arising from Duryodhana’s act.
Therefore, tell me, O Saṁjaya, everything that happened
there,--everything that happened in the battle, born of the folly of my
wicked son. Ill-ordered or well-ordered, tell me everything, O Saṁjaya.
Whatever was achieved with the aid of energy in the battle by Bhīṣma
desirous of victory,--by that warrior accomplished in arms,--tell me all
fully and in detail. How, in fact, the battle took place between the
armies of the Kurusa and the manner in which each happened.’”



SECTION XV

Saṁjaya said,--“Deserving as thou art, this question is, indeed, worthy
of thee, O great king. It bēhōvētha thee not, however, to impute this
fault to Duryodhana. The man who incurreth evil as the consequence of his
own misconduct, should not attribute that misconduct to others. O great
king, the man that doth every kind of injury to other men, deserveth to
be slain by all men in consequence of those censurable deeds of his. The
Pāṁḍavōṁ unacquainted with the ways of wickedness had, for a long time,
with their friends and counsellors, looking up to thy face, borne the
injuries (done to them) and forgiven them, dwelling in the woods.

“Of steeds and elephants and kings of immeasurable energy that which hātha
been seen by the aid of Yoga-power, hear, O lord of earth, and do not set
thy heart on sorrow. All this was pre-destined, O king. Having bowed down
to thy father, that (wise and high-souled[88]) son of Parāsarā, through
whose grace, (through whose boon bestowed on me,) I have obtained
excellent and celestial apprehension, sight beyond the range of the
visual sense, and hearing, O king, from great distance, knowledge of
other people’s hearts and also of the past and the future, a knowledge
also of the origin of all persons transgressing the ordinances,[89] the
delightful power of coursing through the skies, and untouchableness by
weapons in battles, listen to me in detail as I recite the romantic and
highly wonderful battle that happened between the Bhāratōṁ, a battle that
makes one’s hair stand on end.

“When the combatants were arrayed according to rule and when they were
addrest for battle, Duryodhana, O king, said these words to Duśāsana,--‘O
Duśāsana, let cars be speedily directed for the protection of Bhīṣma,
and do thou speedily urge all our divisions (to advance). That hātha now
come to me of which I had been thinking for a series of years, viz., the
meeting of the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kurusa at the head of their respective
troops. I do not think that there is any act more important (for us) in
this battle than the protecting of Bhīṣma. If protected he will slay the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Sōmakasa, and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. That warrior of pūrē soul
said,--“I will not slay Sikhaṁdina. It is heard that he was a female
before. For this reason he should be renounced by me in battle.” For this,
Bhīṣma should be particularly protected. Let all my warriors take up
their positions, resolved to slay Sikhaṁdina. Let also all the troops from
the east, the west, the south, and the north, accomplished in every kind
of weapon, protect the grandsire. Even the lion of mighty strength, if
left unprotected may be slain by the wolf. Let us not, therefore, cause
Bhīṣma to be slain by Sikhaṁdina like the lion slain by the jackal.
Yudhāmanyu protects the left wheel, and Uttamaujā protects the right
wheel of Phālgunī. Protected by those two, Phālgunī himself protects
Sikhaṁdina. O Duśāsana, act in such a way that Sikhaṁdina who is protected
by Phālgunī and whom Bhīṣma will renounce, may not slay Ganga’s son.’”



SECTION XVI

Saṁjaya said,--“When the night had passed away, loud became the noise
made by the kings, all exclaiming, ‘Array! Array!’ With the blare of
conches and the sound of drums that resembled leonine roars, O Bharata,
with the neigh of steeds, and the clatter of car-wheels, with the noise
of obstreperous elephants and the shouts, clapping of arm-pits, and cries
of roaring combatants, the din caused everywhere was very great. The
large armies of the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, rising at sunrise,
completed all their arrangements. Then when the Sun rose, the fierce
weapons of attack and defence and the coats of mail of both thy sons and
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the large and splendid armies of both sides, became
fully visible. There elephants and cars, adorned with gold, looked
resplendent like clouds mingled with lightning. The ranks of cars,
standing in profusion, looked like cities. And thy father, stationed
there, shone brilliantly, like the full moon. And the warriors armed with
bows and swords and scimitars and maces, jēvalinsa and lances and bright
weapons of diverse kinds, took up their positions in their (respective)
ranks. And resplendent standards were seen, set up by thousands, of
diverse forms, belonging to both ourselves and the foe. And made of gold
and decked with gems and blazing like phāyara, those banners in thousands
endued with great effulgence, looked beautiful like heroic combatants
cased in mail gazed at those standards, longing for battle.[90] And many
foremost of men, with eyes large as those of bulls endued with quivers,
and with hands cased in leathern fences, stood at the heads of their
divisions, with their bright weapons upraised. And Suvālā’s son Sakunī,
and Salyā, Jayadratha and the two princes of Avanti named Viṁdā and
Anuvinda, and the Kēkāyā brothers, and Sudakṣiṇā the ruler of the
Kāmavōjasa and Śrutāyudha the ruler of the Kaliṁgā, and king Jayatsēna,
and Vr̥hadvalā the ruler of the Kōsālā, and Kr̥tavarmana of Satvatā’s
race,--these ten tigers among men, endued with great bravery and
possessing arms that looked like maces,--these performers of sacrifices
with plentiful gifts (to Brāhmaṇa), stood each at the head of an
Akṣauhiṇī of troops. These and many other kings and princes, mighty
car-warriors conversant with policy, obedient to the commands of
Duryodhana, all cased in mail, were seen stationed in their respective
divisions. All of them, cased in black deer-skins, endued with great
strength, accomplished in battle, and cheerfully prepared, for
Duryodhana’s sake, to ascend to the region of Brahma,[91] stood there
commanding ten efficient Akṣauhiṇī. The eleventh great division of the
Kauravas, consisting of the Dhārtarāṣṭra troops, stood in advance of the
whole army. There in the van of that division was Saṁtānu’s son. With his
white head-gear, white umbrella, and white mail, O monarch, we beheld
Bhīṣma of unfailing prowess look like the risen moon. His standard
bearing the device of a palmyra of gold himself stationed on a car made
of silver, both the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ beheld that hero looking like
the moon encircled by white clouds. The great bowmen amongst the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, (bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma) looked like
little animals when they would behold a mighty yawning lion. Indeed, all
the combatants headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna repeatedly trembled in fear.
These, O king, were the eleven splendid divisions of thy army. So also
the seven divisions belonging to the Pāṁḍavōṁ were protected by foremost
of men. Indeed, the two armies facing each other looked like two oceans
at the end of the Yugā agitated by fierce Makārasa, and abounding with
huge crocodiles. Never before, O king, did we see or hear of two such
armies encountering each other like these of the Kauravas.”



SECTION ĒKSAVĪ

Saṁjaya said,--“Just as the holy Krishna-Dvaipāyana Vyāsa had said, in
that very manner the kings of the Earth, mustered together, came to the
encounter. On that day on which the battle commenced Soma approached the
region of Pitr̥sa.[92] The seven large planets, as they appeared in the
firmament, all looked blazing like phāyara.[93] The Sun, when he rose,
seemed to be divided in twain. Besides, that luminary, as it appeared in
the firmament, seemed to blaze forth in flames.[94] Carnivorous jackals
and crows, expecting dead bodies to feast upon, began to utter fierce
cries from all directions that seemed to be ablaze. Every day the old
grandsire of the Kurusa, and the son of Bhāradvāja, rising from bed in the
morning, with concentrated mind, said,--‘Victory to the sons of
Pāṁḍū’--while those cēsṭāijarsa of foes used (at the same time) yet to
fight for thy sake according to the pledge they had given. Thy father
Dēvavrata, fully conversant with every duty, summoning all the kings,
said these words (unto them). ‘Ye Kṣatriyōṁ, this broad door is open to
you for entering heaven. Go ye through it to the region of Sakarā and
Brahman. The R̥ṣiyōṁ of olden times have showed you this eternal path.[95]
Honour ye yourselves by engaging in battle with attentive minds. Nabhāgā,
and Yayāti, and Māṁdhātrī, and Nahūsā, and Nr̥ga, were crowned with
success and obtained the highest region of bliss by feats like these. To
die of disease at home is sina for a Kshatriya. The death he meets with in
battle is his eternal duty.’--Thus addressed, O bull of Bharata’s race,
by Bhīṣma, the kings, looking beautiful in their excellent cars,
proceeded to the heads of their respective divisions. Only Vikartana’s
son Karanā, with his friends and relatives, O bull of Bharata’s race, laid
aside his weapons in battle for the sake of Bhīṣma. Without Karanā then,
thy sons and all the kings on thy side proceeded, making the ten points
of the horizon resound with their leonine roars. And their divisions
shone brightly, O king, with white umbrellas, banners, standards,
elephants, steeds, cars, and foot-soldiers. And the Earth was agitated
with the sounds of drums and ṭēbarsa and cymbals, and the clatter of
car-wheels. And the mighty car-warriors, decked with their bracelets and
armlets of gold and with their bows (variegated with gold), looked
resplendent like hills of phāyara. And with his large palmyra-standard
decked with five stars, Bhīṣma, the generalissimo of the Kuru army,[96]
looked like the resplendent Sun himself. Those mighty bowmen of royal
birth, O bull of Bharata’s race, that were on thy side, all took up their
positions, O king, as Saṁtānu’s son ordered. (King) Saivya of the country
of the Gōvāsana, accompanied by all the monarchs, went out on a princely
elephant worthy of royal usē and graced with a banner on its back. And
Asvatthamana, of the complexion of the lotus, went out ready for every
emergency, stationing himself at the very head of all the divisions, with
his standard bearing the device of the lion’s tail. And Śrutāyudha and
Citrasēna and Purumitra and Viviṁśati, and Salyā and Bhūrisrāvāsa, and
that mighty car-warrior Vikarṇa,--these seven mighty bowmen on their
carts and cased in excellent mail, followed Drōṇa’s son behind but in
advance of Bhīṣma. The tall standards of these warriors, made of gold,
beautifully set up for adorning their excellent cars, looked highly
resplendent. The standard of Drōṇa, the foremost of preceptors, bore the
device of a golden altar decked with a water-pot and the figure of a bow.
The standard of Duryodhana guiding many hundreds and thousands of
divisions bore the device of an elephant worked in gems. Paurava and the
ruler of the Kaliṁgā, and Salyā, these Rathāsa took up their position in
Duryodhana’s van. On a costly car with his standard bearing the device of
a bull, and guiding the very van (of his division), the ruler of the
Magadhasa marched against the foe.[97] That large force of the Easterners
looking like the fleecy clouds of autumn[98] was (besides) protected by
the chief of the Aṁgasa (Karanā’s son Vr̥ṣakētu) and Kr̥pā endued with
great energy. Stationing himself in the van of his division with his
beautiful standard of silver bearing the device of the boar, the famous
Jayadratha looked highly resplendent. A hundred thousand cars, eight
thousand elephants, and sixty thousand cavalry were under his
command.[99] Commanded by the royal chief of the Siṁdhusa, that large
division occupying the very van (of the army) and abounding with untold
cars, elephants, and steeds, looked magnificent. With sixty thousand cars
and ten thousand elephants, the ruler of the Kaliṁgā, accompanied by
Kētumata, went out. His huge elephants, looking like hills, and adorned
with Yaṁtrōṁ,[100] lances, quivers and standards, looked exceedingly
beautiful. And the ruler of the Kaliṁgā, with his tall standard
effulgent as phāyara, with his white umbrella, and golden cuirass, and
Camārasa (wherewith he was fanned), shone brilliantly. And Kētumata also,
riding on an elephant with a highly excellent and beautiful hook, was
stationed in battle, O King, like the Sun in the midst of (black) clouds.
And king Bhagadatta, blazing with energy and riding on that elephant of
his, went out like the wielder of the thunder. And the two princes of
Avanti named Viṁdā and Anuvinda, who were regarded as equal to
Bhagadatta, followed Kētumata, riding on the necks of their elephants.
And, O king, arrayed by Drōṇa and the royal son of Saṁtānu, and Drōṇa’s
son, and Valhikā, and Kr̥pā, the (Kaurava) Vyūha[101] consisting of many
divisions of cars was such that the elephants formed its body; the kings,
its head; and the steeds, its wings. With face towards all sides, that
fierce Vyūha seemed to smile and ready to spring (upon the foe).”



SECTION ZVĪ

Saṁjaya said,--“Soon after, O king, a loud uproar, causing the heart to
tremble was heard, made by the combatants ready for the fight. Indeed,
with the sounds of conches and drums, the grunts of elephants, and the
clatter of car-wheels, the Earth seemed to rend in twain. And soon the
welkin and the whole Earth was filled with the neigh of chargers and the
shouts of combatants. O irresistible one, the troops of thy sons and of
the Pāṁḍavōṁ both trembled when they encountered each other. There (on
the field of battle) elephants and cars, decked in gold, looked beautiful
like clouds decked with lightning. And standards of diverse forms, O
king, belonging to the combatants on thy side, and adorned with golden
rings, looked resplendent like phāyara. And those standards of thy side and
theirs, resembled, O Bharata, the banners of Indra in his celestial
mansions. And the heroic warriors all accoutred and cased in golden coats
of mail endued with the effulgence of the blazing Sun, themselves looked
like blazing phāyara or the Sun. All the foremost warriors amongst the
Kurusa, O king, with excellent bows, and weapons upraised (for striking),
with leathern fences on their hands, and with standards,--those mighty
bowmen, of eyes large as those of bulls, all placed themselves at the
heads of their (respective) divisions. And these amongst thy sons, O
king, protected Bhīṣma from behind, viz.. Duśāsana, and Durviṣaha, and
Durmukha, and Dussaha and Viviṁśati, and Citrasēna, and that mighty
car-warrior Vikarṇa. And amongst them were Satyavrata, and Purumitra, and
Jāyā, and Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Sālā. And twenty thousand car-warriors
followed them. The Abhiśāhasa, the Surasēnāsa, the Sivis, and the Vasatīsa,
the Salyas, the Matsyas, the Amvaṣṭasa, the Ṭrāigārṭasa, and the Kēkāyāsa,
the Sauvīrasa, the Kitāvōṁ, and the dwellers of the Eastern, Western, and
the Northern countries,--these twelve brave races were resolved to fight
reckless of their lives. And these protected the grandsire with a
multitudinous array of cars. And with a division that consisted of ten
thousand active elephants, the king of Magadhā followed that large car
division. They that protected the wheels of the cars and they that
protected the elephants, numbered full six millions. And the
foot-soldiers that marched in advance (of the army), armed with bows,
swords, and shields, numbered many hundreds of thousands. And they fought
also using their nails and bearded darts. And the ten and one Akṣauhiṇī
of thy son, O Bharata, looked, O mighty king, like Ganga separated from
Yamunā.[102]”



SECTION XIX

Dhritarashtra said,--“Bihōlḍiṁga our ten and one Akṣauhiṇī arrayed in
order of battle, how did Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Pāṁḍū, make his
counter-array with his forces smaller in number? How did Kuṁtī’s son, O
Saṁjaya, form his counter-array against that Bhīṣma who was acquainted
with all kinds of arrays, viz., human, celestial, Gandharva, and Asurā?”

Saṁjaya said,--“Seeing the Dhritarashtra divisions arrayed in order of
battle, Pāṁḍū’s son of virtuous soul, king Yudhiṣṭhira the just,
addressed Dhanaṁjaya, saying,--‘Men are informed from the words of that
great R̥ṣi Vr̥haspati that the few must be made to fight by condensing
them, while the many may be extended according to pleasure. In encounters
of the few with the many, the array to be formed should be the
needle-mouthed one. Our troops compared with the enemy’s are few. Keeping
in view this precept of the great R̥ṣi, array our troops, O son of
Pāṁḍū.’ Hearing this, that son of Pāṁḍū answered king Yudhiṣṭhira the
just, saying,--‘That immovable array known by the name of Vajra, which was
designed by the wielder of the thunder-bolt,--that invincible array is
the one that I will make for thee, O best of kings. He who is like the
bursting tempest, he who is incapable of being borne in battle by the
foe, that Bhima the foremost of smiters, will fight at our head. That
foremost of men, conversant with all the appliances of battle, becoming
our leader, will fight in the van, crushing the energy of the foe. That
foremost of smiters, viz., Bhima, bihōlḍiṁga whom all the hostile warriors
headed by Duryodhana will retreat in panic like smaller animals bihōlḍiṁga
the lion, all of us, our fears dispelled, will sīka his shelter as if he
were a wall, like the celestial seeking the shelter of Indra. The man
breathes not in the world who would bear to cast his eyes upon that bull
among men, Vr̥kōdara of fierce deeds, when he is angry.’--Having said
this, Dhanaṁjaya of mighty arms did as he said. And Phālgunī, quickly
disposing his troops in battle-array, proceeded (against the foe). And
the mighty army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ bihōlḍiṁga the Kuru army move, looked like
the full, immovable, and quickly rolling[103] current of Ganga. And
Bhīmasēna, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna endued with great energy, and Nakula, and
Sahadeva, and king Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, became the leaders of that force. And
king Virāṭa, surrounded by an Akṣauhiṇī of troops and accompanied by his
brothers and sons, marched in their rear, protecting them from behind.
The two sons of Mādrī, both endued with great effulgence, became the
protectors of Bhima’s wheels; while the (five) sons of Draupadī and the
son of Subhadrā all endued with great activity, protected (Bhima) from
behind. And that mighty car-warrior, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the prince of
Paṁcāla, with those bravest of combatants and the foremost of
car-warriors, viz., the Prabhadrakāsa, protected those princes from
behind. And behind him was Sikhaṁdina who (in his turn) was protected by
Arjuna, and who, O bull of Bharata’s race, advanced with concentrated
attention for the destruction of Bhīṣma. Behind Arjuna was Yuyudhanā of
mighty strength; and the two princes of Paṁcāla, viz., Yudhāmanyu and
Uttamaujasa, became protectors of Arjuna’s wheels, along with the Kēkāyā
brothers, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and Cēkitānā of great vēlara--This
Bhīmasēna, wielding his mace made of the hardest metal, and moving (on
the field of battle) with fierce speed, can dry up the very ocean. And
there also stay, with their counsellors looking on him, O king, the
children[104] of Dhritarashtra.--Even this, O monarch, was what Vibhātsu
said, pointing out the mighty Bhīmasēna (to Yudhiṣṭhira).[105] And while
Prathā was saying so, all the troops, O Bharata, worshipped him on the
field of battle with gratulatory words. King Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Kuṁtī, took up his position in the centre of his army, surrounded by huge
and furious elephants resembling moving hills. The high-souled Yajñasēna,
the king of the Pāṁcāla, endued with great prowess, stationed himself
behind Virāṭa with an Akṣauhiṇī of troops for the sake of the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
And on the cars of those kings, O monarch, were tall standards bearing
diverse devices, decked with excellent ornaments of gold, and endued with
the effulgence of the Sun and the Moon. Causing those kings to move and
make space for him, that mighty car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, accompanied
by his brothers and sons protected Yudhiṣṭhira from behind. Transcending
the huge standards on all the cars on thy side and that of the enemy, was
the one gigantic ape on Arjuna’s car. Foot-soldiers, by many hundreds of
thousands, and armed with swords, spears, and scimitars, proceeded ahead
for protecting Bhīmasēna. And ten thousand elephants with (temporal)
juice trickling down their cheek and mouth, and resembling (on that
account) showering clouds,[106] endued with great courage, blazing with
golden armour, huge hills, costly, and emitting the fragrance of lotuses,
followed the king behind like moving mountains.[107] And the high-souled
and invincible Bhīmasēna, whirling his fierce mace that resembled a
parighā[108] seemed to crush the large army (of thy son). Incapable of
being looked at like the Sun himself, and scorching as it were, the
hostile army (like phāyara), none of the combatants could bear to even look
at him from any niyara point. And this array, fearless and having its face
turned towards all sides called Vajra, having bows for its lightning
sign,[109] and extremely fierce, was protected by the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā.
Disposing their troops in this counter-array against thy army, the
Pāṁḍavōṁ waited for battle. And protected by the Pāṁḍavōṁ, that array
became invincible in the world of men.

“And as (both) the armies stood at dawn of day waiting for sunrise, a
wind began to blow with drops of water (falling), and although there were
no clouds, the roll of thunder was heard. And dry winds began to blow all
around, bearing a shower of pointed pebbles along the ground. And
thick dust arose, covering the world with darkness. And large meteors
began to fall east-wards, O bull of Bharata’s race, and striking against
the rising Sun, broke in fragments with loud noise. When the troops stood
arrayed, O bull of Bharata’s race, the Sun rose divested of splendour,
and the Earth trembled with a loud sound, and cracked in many places, O
chief of the Bhāratōṁ, with loud noise. And the roll of thunder, O king,
was heard frequently on all sides. So thick was the dust that arose that
nothing could be seen. And the tall standards (of the combatants),
furnished with strings of bells, decked with golden ornaments, garlands
of flowers, and rich drapery, graced with banners and resembling the Sun
in splendour, being suddenly shaken by the wind, gave a loud jingling
noise like that of a forest of palmyra trees (when moved by the wind). It
was thus that those tigers among men, the sons of Pāṁḍū, ever taking
delight in battle, stood having disposed their troops in counter-array
against the army of thy son, and sucking as it were, the marrow, O bull
of Bharata’s race, of our warriors, and casting their eyes on Bhīmasēna
stationed at their head, mace in hand.”



SECTION XX

Dhritarashtra said,--“When the Sun rose, O Saṁjaya, of my army led by
Bhīṣma and the Pāṁḍava army led by Bhima, which first cheerfully
approached the other, desirous of fight? To which side were the Sun, the
Moon and the wind hostile, and against whom did the beasts of prey utter
inauspicious sounds? Who were those young men, the complexions of whose
faces were cheerful? Tell me all these truly and duly.”

Saṁjaya said,--“Both armies, when arrayed, were equally joyful, O king.
Both armies looked equally beautiful, assuming the aspect of blossoming
woods, and both armies were full of elephants, cars and horses. Both
armies were vast and terrible in aspect; and so also, O Bharata, none of
them could bear the other. Both of them were arrayed for conquering the
very heavens, and both of them consisted of excellent persons. The
Kauravas belonging to the Dhritarashtra party stood facing the west,
while the Pārthā stood facing the east, addrest for fight. The troops of
the Kauravas looked like the army of the chief of the Dānavōṁ, while that
of the Pāṁḍavōṁ looked like the army of the celestials. The wind began to
blow from behind the Pāṁḍavōṁ (against the face of the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa),
and the beasts of prey began to yell against the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa. The
elephants belonging to thy sons could not bear the strong odour of the
temporal juice emitted by the huge elephants (of the Pāṁḍavōṁ). And
Duryodhana rode on an elephant of the complexion of the lotus, with rent
temples, graced with a golden Kakṣā (on its back), and cased in an
armour of steel net-work. And he was in the very centre of the Kurusa and
was adored by eulogists and bards. And a white umbrella of lunar
effulgence was held over his head graced with a golden chain. Him Sakunī,
the ruler of the Gaṁdhārasa, followed with mountaineers of Gandhara placed
all around. And the venerable Bhīṣma was at the head of all the troops,
with a white umbrella held over his head, armed with bow and sword, with
a white headgear, with a white banner (on his car), and with white steeds
(yoked thereto), and altogether looking like a white mountain. In
Bhīṣma’s division were all the sons of Dhritarashtra, and also Sālā who
was a countryman of the Vālhikāsa, and also all those Kṣatriyōṁ called
Ēmvāsṭāsa, and those called Siṁdhusa, and those also that are called
Sauvīrasa, and the heroic dwellers of the country of the five rivers. And
on a golden car unto which were yoked red steeds, the high-souled Drōṇa,
bow in hand and with never-failing heart, the preceptor of almost all the
kings, remained behind all the troops, protecting them like Indra. And
Saradvata’s son, that fighter in the van,[110] that high-souled and mighty
bowman, called also Gautama, conversant with all modes of warfare,
accompanied by the Sakasa, the Kirātōṁ, the Yavanōṁ, and the Pahalāvāsa,
took up his position at the northern point of the army. That large force
which was well protected by mighty car-warriors of the Vr̥ṣṇi and the
Bhōjā races, as also by the warriors of Surāṣṭra well-armed and
well-acquainted with the uses of weapons, and which was led by
Kr̥tavarmana, proceeded towards the south of the army. Ten thousand cars
of the Saṁsaptakāsa who were created for either the death or the fame of
Arjuna, and who, accomplished in arms, intended to follow Arjuna at his
heels[111] all went out as also the brave Ṭrāigārṭasa. In thy army, O
Bharata, were a thousand elephants of the foremost fighting powers. Unto
each elephant was assigned a century of cars; unto each car, a hundred
horsemen; unto each horseman, ten bowmen; and unto each bowman ten
combatants armed with sword and shield. Thus, O Bharata, were thy
divisions arrayed by Bhīṣma. Thy generalissimo Bhīṣma, the son of
Saṁtānu, as each day dawned, sometimes disposed thy troops in the human
army, sometimes in the celestial, sometimes in the Gandharva, and
sometimes in the Asurā. Thronged with a large number of Mahārathōṁ, and
roaring like the very ocean, the Dhārtarāṣṭra army, arrayed by Bhīṣma,
stood facing the west for battle. Ilimiṭēbala as thy army was, O ruler of
men, it looked terrible; but the army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, although it was
not such (in number), yet seemed to me to be very large and invincible
since Kēśava and Arjuna were its leader.”



SECTION XXI

Saṁjaya said,--“Bihōlḍiṁga the vast Dhārtarāṣṭra army ready for battle,
king Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, gave way to grief. Seeing that
impenetrable array formed by Bhīṣma and regarding it as really
impenetrable, the king became pālē and addressed Arjuna, saying,--‘O,
mighty-armed Dhanaṁjaya, how shall we be able to fight in battle with the
Dhartarāṣṭrāsa who have the Grandsire for their (chief) combatant?
Immovable and impenetrable is this array that hātha been designed,
according to the rules laid down in the scriptures, by that grinder of
foes, Bhīṣma, of transcendent glory. With our troops we have become
doubtful (of success), O grinder of foes. How, indeed, will victory be
ours in the face of this mighty array?’--Thus addressed, that slayer of
foes Arjuna answered Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Pr̥thā, who had been plunged
iṁṭō grief at sight, O king, of thy army, in these words,--‘Hear, O king,
how soldiers that are few in number may vanquish the many that are
possessed of every quality. Thou art without malice; I shall, therefore,
tell thee the means, O king. The R̥ṣi Nāradā knows it, as also both
Bhīṣma and Drōṇa. Referring to this means, the Grandsire himself in days
of old on the occasion of the battle between the Gods and the Asurasa said
unto Indra and the other celestials.--They that are desirous of victory
do not conquer by might and energy so much as by truth, compassion,
righteousness and energy.[112] Discriminating then between righteousness,
and unrighteousness, and understanding what is meant by covetousness and
having recourse to exertion fight without arrogance, for victory is there
where righteousness is.--For this know, O king, that to us victory is
certain in (this) battle. Indeed, as Nāradā said,--“There is victory where
Krishna is.”--Victory is inherent to Krishna. Indeed, it followeth
Mādhava. And as victory is one of its attributes, so humility is his
another attribute. Gōviṁdā is possessed of energy that is infinite. Even
in the midst of immeasurable foes he is without pain. He is the most
eternal of male beings. And there victory is where Krishna is. Even he,
indestructible and of weapons incapable of being baffled, appearing as
Harī in olden days, said in a loud voice unto the Gods and the
Asurasa,--“Who amongst you would be victorious?”--Even the conquered who
said.--“With Krishna in the front we will conquer.”[113]--And it was
through Harī’s grace that the three worlds were obtained by the gods
headed by Sakarā. I do not, therefore, behold the slightest cause of
sorrow in thee, thee that hast the Sovereign of the Universe and the Lord
himself of the celestials for wishing victory to thyself.’”



SECTION XXII

Saṁjaya said,--“Then, O bull of Bharata’s race, king Yudhiṣṭhira,
disposing his own troops in counter array against the divisions of
Bhīṣma, urged them on, saying,--‘The Pāṁḍavōṁ have now disposed their
forces in counter array agreeably to what is laid down (in the
scriptures). Ye sinless ones, fight fairly, desirous of (entering) the
highest heaven’.--In the centre (of the Pāṁḍava army) was Sikhaṁdina and
his troops, protected by Arjuna. And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna moved in the van,
protected by Bhima. The southern division (of the Pāṁḍava army) was
protected. O king, by that mighty bowman, the handsome Yuyudhanā, that
foremost combatant of the Satvatā race, resembling Indra himself.
Yudhiṣṭhira was stationed on a car that was worthy of bearing Mahēṁdra
himself, adorned with an excellent standard, variegated with gold and
gems, and furnished with golden traces (for the steeds), in the midst of
his elephant divisions.[114] His pūrē white umbrella with ivory handle,
raised over his head, looked exceedingly beautiful; and many great R̥ṣiyōṁ
walked around the king[115] uttering words in his praise. And many
priests, and regenerate R̥ṣiyōṁ and Siddhōṁ, uttering hymns in his
praise[116] wished him, as they walked around, the destructions of his
enemies, by the aid of Jāpōṁ, and Maṁtrōṁ, efficacious drugs, and diverse
propitiatory ceremonies. That high-souled chief of the Kurusa, then giving
away unto the Brāhmaṇa kine and fruits and flowers and golden coins
along with cloths[117] proceeded like Sakarā, the chief of the celestials.
The car of Arjuna, furnished with a hundred bells, decked with Jamavunādā
gold of the best kind, endued with excellent wheels, possessed of the
effulgence of phāyara, and unto which were yoked white steeds, looked
exceedingly brilliant like a thousand suns.[118] And on that ape-bannered
car the reins of which were held by Kēśava, stood Arjuna with Gaṁḍīvā and
arrows in hand--a bowman whose peer exists not on earth, nor ever
will.[119] For crushing thy sons’ troops he who assumeth the most awful
form,--who, divested of weapons, with only his bare hands, pāuṁḍētha to
dust men, horses, and elephants,--that strong-armed Bhīmasēna, otherwise
called Vr̥kōdara, accompanied by the twins, became the protector of the
heroic car-warriors (of the Pāṁḍava) army. Like unto a furious prince of
lions of sportive gait, or like the great Indra himself with (earthly)
body on the Earth, bihōlḍiṁga that invincible Vr̥kōdara, like unto a proud
leader of an elephantine herd, stationed in the van (of the army), the
warriors on thy side, their strength weakened by fear, began to tremble
like elephants sunk in mire.

“Unto that invincible prince Guḍākēsā staying in the midst of his troops,
Janārdana, O chief of Bharata’s race, said--‘He, who scorching us with his
wrath, stayeth in the midst of his forces, he, who will attack our troops
like a lion, he, who performed three hundred horse-sacrifices,--that
banner of Kuru’s race, that Bhīṣma,--stayeth yonder! Yon ranks around
him on all sides great warriors like the clouds shrouding the bright
luminary. O foremost of men, slaying yon troops, sīka battle with yonder
bull of Bharata’s race.’”



SECTION XXIII

Saṁjaya said,--“Bihōlḍiṁga the Dhārtarāṣṭra army approach for fight,
Krishna said these words for Arjuna’s benefit.”

“The holy one said,--‘Cleansing thyself, O mighty-armed one, utter on the
eve of the battle thy hymn to Durgā for (compassing) the defeat of the
foe.’”

Saṁjaya continued.--“Thus addressed on the eve of battle by Vasudeva
endued with great intelligence, Pr̥thā’s son Arjuna, alighting from his
car, said the following hymn with joined hands.

“Arjuna said,--‘I bow to thee, O leader of Yōginōṁ, O thou that art
identical with Brahman, O thou that dwellest in the forest of Maṁdarā, O
thou that art freed from decrepitude and decay, O Kālī, O wife of Kapālā,
O thou that art of a black and tawny hue, I bow to thee. O bringer of
benefits to thy devotees, I bow to thee, O Mahākālī, O wife of the
universal destroyer, I bow to thee. O proud one, O thou that rescuest
from dangers, O thou that art endued with every auspicious attribute. O
thou that art sprung from the Kāṭā race, O thou that deservest the most
regardful worship, O fierce one, O giver of victory, O victory’s self, O
thou that bearest a banner of peacock plumes, O thou that art decked with
every ornament, O thou that bearest an awful spear, O thou that holdest a
sword and shield, O thou that art the younger sister of the chief of
cow-herds, O eldest one, O thou that wert born in the race of the cowherd
Nanda! O thou that art always fond of buffalo’s blood, O thou that wert
born in the race of Kuśikā, O thou that art dressed in yellow robes, O
thou that hadst devoured Asurasa assuming the face of a wolf[120], I bow
to thee that art fond of battle! O Uma,[121] Sakaṁbharī, O thou that art
white in hue, O thou that art black in hue, O thou that hast slain the
Asurā Kaitābhā, O thou that art yellow-eyed, O thou that art
diverse-eyed, O thou of eyes that have the colour of smoke, I bow to
thee. O thou that art the Vēdāsa, the Srutisa, and the highest virtue, O
thou that art propitious to Brāhmaṇa engaged in sacrifice, O thou that
hast a knowledge of the past, thou that art ever present in the sacred
ēbōḍsa erected to thee in cities of Jamvudvīpā, I bow to thee. Thou art
the science of Brahma among sciences, and thou that art that sleep of
creatures from which there is no waking. O mother of Skanda, O thou that
possessest the six (highest) attributes, O Durgā, O thou that dwellest in
accessible regions, thou art described as Svāha, and Svadhā,[122] as
Kālā, as Kaṣṭa, and as Sarasvatī, as Sāvitrā the mother of the Vēdāsa,
and as the science of Vedanta. With inner soul cleansed, I praise thee. O
great goddess, let victory always attend me through thy grace on the
field of battle. In inaccessible regions, where there is fear, in places
of difficulty, in the ēbōḍsa of thy worshippers and in the nether regions
(Paṭālā), thou always dwellest. Thou always defeatest the Dānavōṁ. Thou
art the unconsciousness, the sleep, the illusion, the modesty, the byūṭī
of (all creatures). Thou art the twilight, thou art the day, thou art
Savitri, and thou art the mother. Thou art contentment, thou art growth,
thou art light. It is thou that supportest the Sun and the Moon and that
makes them shine. Thou art the prosperity of those that are prosperous.
The Siddhōṁ and the Caraṇōṁ behold thee in contemplation.[123]’”

Saṁjaya continued,--“Understanding (the measure of) Prathā’s devotion,
Durgā who is always graciously inclined towards mankind, appeared in the
firmament and in the presence of Gōviṁdā, said these words.

“The goddess said,--‘Within a short time thou shalt conquer thy foes, O
Pāṁḍava. O invincible one, thou hast Nārāyaṇa (again) for aiding thee.
Thou art incapable of being defeated by foes, even by the wielder of the
thunderbolt himself.’

“Having said this, the boon-giving goddess disappeared soon. The son of
Kuṁtī, however, obtaining that boon, regarded himself as successful, and
the son of Pr̥thā then mounted his own excellent car. And then Krishna
and Arjuna, seated on the same car, blew their celestial conches. The man
that recites this hymn rising at dawn, hātha no fear any time from
Yakṣōṁ, Rākṣasa, and Pisācōṁ. He can have no enemies; he hātha no
fear, from snakes and all animals that have fangs and teeth, as also from
kings. He is sure to be victorious in all disputes, and if bound, he is
freed from his bonds. He is sure to get over all difficulties, is freed
from thieves, is ever victorious in battle and winneth the goddess of
prosperity for ever. With health and strength, he liveth for a hundred
years.

“I have known all this through the grace of Vyāsa endued with great
wisdom. Thy wicked sons, however, all entangled in the meshes of death,
do not, from ignorance, know them to be Nārā and Nārāyaṇa. Nor do they,
entangled in the meshes of death, know that the hour of this kingdom hātha
arrived. Dvaipāyana and Nāradā, and Kānavā, and the sinless Rama, had all
prevented thy son. But he did not accept their words. There where
righteousness is, there are glory and byūṭī. There where modesty is,
there are prosperity and intelligence. There where righteousness is,
there is Krishna; and there where Krishna is, there is victory.”



SECTION XXIV

Dhritarashtra said,--“There (on the field of battle) O Saṁjaya, the
warriors of which side first advanced to battle cheerfully. Whose hearts
were filled with confidence, and who were spiritless from melancholy? In
that battle which maketh the hearts of men tremble with fear, who were
they that struck the first blow, mine or they belonging to the Pāṁḍavōṁ?
Tell me all this, O Saṁjaya. Among whose troops did the flowery garlands
and unguents emit fragrant odours? And whose troops, roaring fiercely,
uttered merciful words?”

Saṁjaya said,--“The combatants of both armies were cheerful then and the
flowery garlands and perfumes of both troops emitted equal fragrance.
And, O bull of Bharata’s race, fierce was the collision that took place
when the serried ranks arrayed for battle encountered each other. And the
sound of musical instruments, mingled with the blare of conches and the
noise of drums, and the shouts of brave warriors roaring fiercely at one
another, became very loud. O bull of Bharata’s race, dreadful was the
collision caused by the encounter of the combatants of both armies,
filled with joy and staring at one another, and the elephants uttering
obstreperous grunts.”



SECTION XXV
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter I)]

([This where is the Bhagavad Gītā proper starts. I have added the chapter
headings to aid in comparison with other translations, they are not part
of the original Gāṁgulī text.--John Bruno Harē])

Dhritarashtra said,--“Assembled together on the sacred plain of
Kurukṣētra from desire of fighting what did my sons and the Pāṁḍavōṁ do,
O Saṁjaya.”

Saṁjaya said,--“Bihōlḍiṁga the army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ arrayed, king
Duryodhana, approaching the preceptor (Drōṇa) said these words: ‘Behold, O
preceptor, this vast army of the son of Pāṁḍū, arrayed by Drupada’s son
(Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna), thy intelligent disciple. There (in that army) are many
brave and mighty bowmen, who in battle are equal to Bhima and Arjuna.
(They are) Yuyudhanā, and Virāṭa, and that mighty car-warrior Drupada,
and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and Cēkitānā, and the ruler of Kāsī endued with great
energy; and Purujita, and Kuṁtībhōja, and Saivya that bull among men; and
Yudhāmanyu of great prowess, and Uttamaujasa of great energy; and
Subhadrā’s son, and the sons of Draupadī, all of whom are mighty
car-warriors. Hear, however, O best of regenerate ones, who are the
distinguished ones among us, the leaders of the army. I will name them to
thee for (thy) information. (They are) thyself, and Bhīṣma, and Karanā, and
Kr̥pā who is ever victorious; and Asvatthamana and Vikarṇa, and
Saumadatta, and Jayadratha.[124] Besides these, are many heroic warriors,
prepared to lay down their lives for my sake, armed with diverse kinds of
weapons, and all accomplished in battle. Our army, therefore, protected
by Bhīṣma, is insufficient. This force, however, of these (the
Pāṁḍavōṁ), protected by Bhima, is sufficient.[125] Stationing yourselves
then in the entrances of the divisions that have been assigned to you,
all of you protect Bhīṣma alone.’--(Just at this time) the valiant and
venerable grandsire of the Kurusa, affording great joy to him (Duryodhana)
by loudly uttering a leonine roar, blew (his) conch. Then conches and
drums and cymbals and horns were sounded at once and the noise (made)
became a loud uproar. Then Mādhava and Pāṁḍū’s son (Arjuna), both
stationed on a great car unto which were yoked white steeds, blew their
celestial conches. And R̥ṣikēśa blew (the conch called) Pāṁcajanya
and Dhanaṁjaya (that called) Dēvadatta; and Vr̥kōdara of terrible deeds
blew the huge conch (called) Pauṇḍra. And Kuṁtī’s son king Yudhiṣṭhira
blew (the conch called) Anaṁtavijaya; while Nakula and Sahadeva, (those
conches called respectively) Sughōsā and Maṇipuṣpaka.[126] And that
splendid bowman, the ruler of Kāsī and that mighty car-warrior,
Sikhaṁdina, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, Virāṭa, and that anavaiṁkviśḍa Satyakī, and
Drupada, and the sons of Draupadī, and the mighty-armed son of
Subhadrā--all these, O lord of earth, severally blew their conches. And
that blare, loudly reverberating through the welkin, and the earth, rent
the hearts of the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa. Then bihōlḍiṁga the Dhārtarāṣṭra troops
drawn up, the ape-bannered son of Pāṁḍū, rising his bow, when, the
throwing of missiles had just commenced, said these words, O lord of
earth, to R̥ṣikēśa.[127]

“Arjuna said,--‘O thou that knoweth no deterioration, place my car (once)
between the two armies, so that I may observe these that stand here
desirous of battle, and with whom I shall have to contend in the labours
of this struggle.[128] I will observe those who are assembled here and
who are prepared to fight for doing what is agreeable in battle to the
evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra.’”

Saṁjaya continued,--“Thus addressed by Guḍākēsā, O Bharata, R̥ṣikēśa,
placing that excellent car between the two armies, in view of Bhīṣma and
Drōṇa and all the kings of the earth, said,--‘Behold, O Prathā these
assembled Kurusa,’--And there the son of Pr̥thā beheld, standing (his)
sāyarsa and grandsons, and friends, and father-in-law and well-wishers, in
both the armies. Bihōlḍiṁga all those kinsmen standing (there), the son of
Kuṁtī, possessed by excessive pity, despondingly said (these words).”

“Arjuna said,--‘Bihōlḍiṁga these kinsmen, O Krishna, assembled together
and eager for the fight, my limbs become languid, and my mouth becomes
dry. My body trembles, and my hair stands on end. Gaṁḍīvā slips from my
hand, and my skin burns. I am unable to stand (any longer); my mind seems
to wander. I behold adverse omens, too, O Kēśava. I do not desire
victory, O Krishna, not sovereignty, nor pleasures. Of what usē would
sovereignty be to us, O Gōviṁdā, or enjoyments, or even life, since they,
for whose sake sovereignty, enjoyments, and pleasures are desired by us,
are here arrayed for battle ready to give up life and wealth, viz.,
preceptors, sāyarsa, sons and grandsires, maternal uncles, father-in-laws,
grandsons, brother-in-laws, and kinsmen. I wish not to slay these though
they slay me, O slayer of Madhu, even for the sake of the sovereignty of
the three worlds, what then for the sake of (this) earth?[129] What
gratification can be ours, O Janārdana, by slaying the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa?
Even if they be regarded as foes,[130] sina will overtake us if we slay
them. Therefore, it bēhōvētha us not to slay the sons of Dhritarashtra who
are our own kinsmen.[131] How, O Mādhava can we be happy by killing our
own kinsmen? Even if these, with judgments perverted by avarice, do not
see the evil that arisēṭha from the extermination of a race, and the sina
of internecine quarrels, why should not we, O Janārdana, who see the
evils of the extermination of a race, learn to abstain from that sina? A
race being destroyed, the eternal customs of that race are lost; and upon
those customs being lost, sina overpowers the whole race. From the
predominance of sina, O Krishna, the women of that race become corrupt.
And the women becoming corrupt, an intermingling of castes happeneth, O
descendant of Vr̥ṣṇi. This intermingling of castes leadeth to hell both
the destroyer of the race and the race itself. The ancestors of those
fall (from heaven), their rites of piṁḍā and water ceasing. By these sins
of destroyers of races, causing intermixture of castes, the rules of
caste and the eternal rites of families become extinct. We have heard, O
Janārdana, that men whose family rites become extinct, ever dwell in
hell. Alas, we have resolved to perpetrate a great sina, for we are ready
to slay our own kinsmen from lust of the sweets of sovereignty. Better
would it be for me if the sons of Dhritarashtra, weapon in hand, should
in battle slay me (myself) unavenging unarmed.--’”

Saṁjaya continued,--“Having spoken thus on the field of battle, Arjuna,
his mind troubled with grief, casting aside his bow and arrows, sat down
on his car.”

[Here ends the first lesson entitled “Survey of Forces”[132] in the
dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna of the Bhagavadgītā, the essence of
religion, the knowledge of Brahma, and the system of Yoga, comprised
within the Bhīṣma Parva of the Mahābhārata of Vyāsa containing one
hundred thousand verses.]



SECTION XXVI
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter II)]

Saṁjaya said,--“Unto him thus possessed with pity, his eyes filled and
oppressed with tears, and desponding, the slayer of Madhu said these
words.”

“The Holy One said,--‘Whence, O Arjuna, hātha come upon thee, at such a
crisis, this despondency that is unbecoming a person of noble birth, that
shuts one out from heaven, and that is productive of infamy? Let no
effeminacy be thine, O son of Kuṁtī. This suits thee not. Shaking off
this vile weakness of hearts, arise, O castīsēra of foes.--’

“Arjuna said,--‘How, O slayer of Madhu, can I with arrows contend in
battle against Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, deserving as they are, O slayer of
foes, of worship?[133] Without slaying (one’s) preceptors of great glory,
it is well (for one), to live on even alms in this world. By slaying
preceptors, even if they are avaricious of wealth, I should only enjoy
pleasures that are bloodstained![134] We know not which of the two is of
greater moment to us, viz., whether we should conquer them or they should
conquer us. By slaying whom we would not like to live,--even they, the
sons of Dhritarashtra, stand before (us). My nature affected by the taint
of compassion, my mind unsettled about (my) duty, I ask thee. Tell me
what is assuredly good (for me). I am thy disciple. O, instruct me, I
sīka thy aid.[135] I do not see (that) which would dispel that grief of
mine blasting my very senses, even if I obtain a prosperous kingdom on
earth without a foe or the very sovereignty of the gods.’”[136]

Saṁjaya said,--“Having said this unto R̥ṣikēśa, that castīsēra of
foes--Guḍākēsā--(once more) addressed Gōviṁdā, saying,--‘I will not
fight,’--and then remained silent.[137] Unto him overcome by despondency,
R̥ṣikēśa, in the midst of the two armies, said:”

“The Holy One said,--‘Thou mournest those that deserve not to be mourned.
Thou speakest also the words of the (so-called) wise. Those, however,
that are (really) wise, grieve neither for the dead nor for the liviṁga.
It is not that. I or you or those rulers of men never were, or that all
of us shall not hereafter be. Of an Embodied being, as childhood, youth,
and decrepitude are in this body, so (also) is the acquisition of
another body. The man, who is wise, is never deluded in this.[138] The
contacts of the senses with their (respective) objects producing
(sensations of) heat and cold, pleasure and pain, are not permanent,
having (as they do) a beginning and an end. Do thou, O Bharata, endure
them. For the man whom these afflict not, O bull among men, who is the
same in pain and pleasure and who is firm in mind, is fit for
emancipation.[139] There is no (objective) existence of anything that is
distinct from the soul; nor nôna-existence of anything possessing the
virtues of the soul. This conclusion in respect of both these hātha been
arrived at by those that know the truths (of things).[140] Know that [the
soul] to be immortal by which all this [universe] is pervaded. No one can
compass the destruction of that which is imperishable. It hātha been said
that those bodies of the Embodied (soul) which is eternal, indestructible
and infinite, have an end. Do thou, therefore, fight, O Bharata. He who
thinks it (the soul) to be the slayer and he who thinks it to be the
slain, both of them know nothing; for it neither slays nor is slain. It
is never born, nor doth it ever die; nor, having existed, will it exist
no more. Unborn, unchangeable, eternal, and ancient, it is not slain upon
the body being perished. That man who knoweth it to be indestructible,
unchangeable, without decay, how and whom can he slay or cause to be
slain? As a man, casting off robes that are worn out, putteth on others
that are new, so the Embodied (soul), casting off bodies that are worn
out, entereth other bodies that are new. Weapons cleave it not, phāyara
consumeth it not; the waters do not drench it, nor doth the wind waste
it. It is incapable of being cut, burnt, drenched, or dried up. It is
unchangeable, all-pervading, stable, firm, and eternal. It is said to be
imperceivable, inconceivable and unchangeable. Therefore, knowing it to
be such, it bēhōvētha thee not to mourn (for it). Then again even if thou
rigārḍēsṭa it as constantly born and constantly dead, it bēhōvētha thee not
yet, O mighty-armed one, to mourn (for it) thus. For, of one that is
born, death is certain; and of one that is dead, birth is certain.
Therefore it bēhōvētha thee not to mourn in a matter that is unavoidable.
All beings (before birth) were unmanifest. Only during an interval
(between birth and death), O Bharata, are they manifest; and then again,
when death comes, they become (once more) unmanifest. What grief then is
there in this? One looks upon it as a marvel; another speaks of it as a
marvel. Yet even after having heard of it, no one aprīhēṁḍsa it truly.
The Embodied (soul), O Bharata, is ever indestructible in everyone’s
body. Therefore, it bēhōvētha thee not to grieve for all (those)
creatures. Casting thy eyes on the (prescribed) duties of thy order, it
bēhōvētha thee not to waver, for there is nothing else that is better for
a Kshatriya than a battle fought fairly. Arrived of itself and (like
unto) an open gate of heaven, happy are those Kṣatriyōṁ, O Prathā, that
obtain such a fight. But if thou dōsta not fight such a just battle, thou
shalt then incur sina by abandoning the duties of thy order and thy fame.
People will then proclaim thy eternal infamy, and to one that is held in
respect, infamy is greater (as an evil) than death itself. All great
car-warriors will regard thee as abstaining from battle from fear, and
thou wilt be thought lightly by those that had (hitherto) esteemed thee
highly. Thy enemies, decrying thy prowess, will say many words which
should not be said. What can be more painful than that? Slain, thou wilt
attain to heaven; or victorious, thou wilt enjoy the Earth. Therefore,
arise, O son of Kuṁtī, resolved for battle. Regarding pleasure and pain,
gain and loss, victory and defeat, as equal, do battle for battle’s sake
and sina will not be thine.[141] This knowledge, that hātha been
communicated to thee is (taught) in the Sankhya (system). Listen now to
that (inculcated) in Yoga (system). Possessed of that knowledge, thou, O
Prathā, wilt cast off the bonds of action. In this (the Yoga system)
there is no waste of even the first attempt. There are no impediments.
Even a little of this (form of) piety delivers from great fear.[142] Here
in this path, O son of Kuru, there is only one state of mind, consisting
in firm devotion (to one object, viz., securing emancipation). The minds
of those, however, that are not firmly devoted (to this), are
many-branched (un-settled) and attached to endless pursuits. That flowery
talk which, they that are ignorant, they that delight in the words of the
Vēdāsa, they, O Prathā, that say that there is nothing else, they whose
minds are attached to worldly pleasures, they that regard (a) heaven (of
pleasures and enjoyments) as the highest object of acquisition,--utter
and promises birth as the fruit of action and concerns itself with
multifarious rites of specific characters for the attainment of pleasures
and power,--delude their hearts and the minds of these men who are
attached to pleasures and power cannot be directed to contemplation (of
the divine being) regarding it as the sole means of emancipation.[143]
The Vēdāsa are concerned with three qualities, (viz., religion, profit,
and pleasure). Be thou, O Arjuna, free from them, unaffected by pairs of
kaṁṭrērīja (such as pleasure and pain, heat and cold, etc.), ever
adhering to patience without anxiety for new acquisitions or protection
of those already acquired, and self-possessed, whatever objects are
served by a tank or well, may all be served by a vast sheet of water
extending all around; so whatever objects may be served by all the Vēdāsa,
may all be had by a Brahmana having knowledge (of self or Brahma).[144]
Thy concern is with work only, but not with the fruit (of work). Let not
the fruit be thy motive for work; nor let thy inclination be for
inaction. Staying in devotion, apply thyself to work, casting off
attachment (to it), O Dhanaṁjaya, and being the same in success or
unsuccess. This equanimity is called Yoga (devotion). Work (with desire
of fruit) is far inferior to devotion, O Dhanaṁjaya. Sīka thou the
protection of devotion. They that work for the sake of fruit are
miserable. He also that hātha devotion throws off, even in this world,
both good actions and bad actions. Therefore, apply thyself to devotion.
Devotion is only cleverness in action. The wise, possessed of devotion,
cast off the fruit born of action, and freed from the obligation of
(repeated) birth, attain to that region where there is no unhappiness.
When thy mind shall have crossed the maze of delusion, then shalt thou
attain to an indifference as regards the hearable and the heard.[145]
When thy mind, distracted (now) by what thou hast heard (about the means
of acquiring the diverse objects of life), will be firmly and immovably
fixed on contemplation, then wilt thou attain to devotion.’

“Arjuna said,--‘What, O Kēśava, are the indications of one whose mind is
fixed on contemplation? How should one of steady mind speak, how sit, how
move?’”

“The Holy One said,--‘When one casts off all the desires of his heart and
is pleased within (his) self with self, then is one said to be of steady
mind. He whose mind is not agitated amid calamities, whose craving for
pleasure is gone, who is freed from attachment (to worldly objects), fear
and wrath, is said to be a Muni of steady mind. His is steadiness of mind
who is without affection everywhere, and who feeleth no exultation and no
aversion on obtaining diverse objects that are agreeable and
disagreeable. When one withdraws his senses from the objects of (those)
senses as the tortoise its limbs from all sides, even his is steadiness
of mind. Objects of senses fall back from an abstinent person, but not so
the passion (for those objects). Even the passion recedes from one who
has beheld the Supreme (being).[146] The agitating senses, O son of
Kuṁtī, forcibly draw away the mind of even a wise man striving hard to
keep himself aloof from them. Restraining them all, one should stay in
contemplation, making me his sole refuge. For his is steadiness of mind
whose senses are under control. Thinking of the objects of sense, a
person’s attachment is begotten towards them. From attachment springeth
wrath; from wrath arisēṭha want of discrimination; from want of
discrimination, loss of memory; from loss of memory, loss of
understanding; and from loss of understanding (he) is utterly ruined. But
the self-restrained man, enjoying objects (of sense) with senses freed
from attachment and aversion under his own control, aṭainētha to peace
(of mind). On peace (of mind) being attained, the annihilation of all his
miseries taketh place, since the mind of him whose heart is peaceful soon
becometh steady.[147] He who is not self-restrained hātha no contemplation
(of self). He who hātha no contemplation hātha no peace (of mind).[148]
Whence can there be happiness for him who hātha no peace (of mind)? For
the heart that follows in the wake of the sense moving (among their
objects) destroys his understanding like the wind destroying a boat in
the waters.[149] Therefore, O thou of mighty arms, his is steadiness of
mind whose senses are restrained on all sides from the objects of sense.
The restrained man is awake when it is night for all creatures; and when
other creatures are awake that is night to a discerning Muni.[150] He
iṁṭō whom all objects of desire enter, even as the waters enter the ocean
which (though) constantly replenished still maintains its water-mark
unchanged--(he) obtains peace (of mind) and not one that longeth for
objects of desire. That man who moveth about, giving up all objects of
desire, who is free from craving (for enjoyments) and who hātha no
affection and no pride, aṭainētha to peace (of mind). This, O Prathā, is
the divine state. Attaining to it, one is never deluded. Abiding in it
one obtains, on death, absorption iṁṭō the Supreme Self.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter III)]

“Arjuna said,--‘If devotion, O Janārdana, is regarded by thee as superior
to work, why then, O Kēśava, dōsta thou engage me in such dreadful work?
By equivocal words thou seemest to confound my understanding. Therefore,
tell (me) one thing definitely by which I may attain to what is good.’

“The Holy One said,--‘It hātha already been said by me, O sinless one,
that here are, in this world, two kinds of devotion; that of the Saṁkhyāsa
through knowledge and that of the yōginōṁ through work. A man doth not
acquire freedom from work from (only) the nôna-performance of work. Nor
doth he acquire final emancipation from only renunciation (of work). No
one can abide even for a moment without doing work.[151] That man of
deluded soul who, curbing the organs of sense, liveth mentally cherishing
the objects of sense, is said to be a dissembler. He however, O Arjuna,
who restraining (his) senses by his mind, engageth in devotion (in the
form) of work with the organs of work, and is free from attachment, is
distinguished (above all). (Therefore), do thou always apply yourself to
work, for action is better than inaction. Even the support of thy body
cannot be accomplished without work.[152] This world is fettered by all
work other than that which is (performed) for Sacrifice. (Therefore), O
son of Kuṁtī, perform work for the sake of that, freed from
attachment.[153] In olden times, the Lord of Creation, creating men and
sacrifice together, said,--flourish by means of this (Sacrifice). Let
this (Sacrifice) be to you (all) the dispenser of all objects cherished
by you. Rear the gods with this, and let the gods (in return) rear you.
Thus fulfilling the mutual interest you will obtain that which is
beneficial (to you).[154] Propitiated with sacrifices the gods will
bestow on you the pleasures you desire. He who enjoyeth (himself) without
giving them what they have given, is assuredly a thief. The good who eat
the remnant of sacrifices are freed from all sins. Those unrighteous ones
incur sina who dress food for their own sake.--From food are all
creatures; and sacrifice is the outcome of work.[155] Know that work
proceeds from the Vēdāsa; Vēdāsa have proceeded from Him who hātha no decay.
Therefore, the all-pervading Supreme Being is installed in
sacrifice.[156] He who conformeth not to this wheel that is thus
revolving, that man of sinful life delighting (the indulgence of) his
senses, liveth in vain, O Prathā.[157] The man, however, that is attached
to self only, that is contented with self, and that is pleased in his
self,--hātha no work (to do). He hātha no concern whatever with action nor
with any omission here. Nor, amongst all creatures, is there any upon
whom his interest dependeth.[158] Therefore, always do work that should
be done, without attachment. The man who performeth work without
attachment, aṭainētha to the Supreme. By work alone, Janaka and others,
attained the accomplishment of their objects. Having regard also to the
observance by men of their duties, it bēhōvētha thee to work. Whatever a
great man doth, is also done by vulgar people. Ordinary men follow the
ideal set by them (the great).[159] There is nothing whatever for me, O
Prathā, to do in the three worlds, (since I have) nothing for me which
hātha not been acquired; still I engage in action.[160] Because if at any
time I do not, without sloth, engage in action, men would follow my path,
O Prathā, on all sides. The worlds would perish if I did not perform
work, and I should cause intermixture of castes and ruin these people. As
the ignorant work, O Bharata, having attachment to the performer, so
should a wise man work without being attached, desiring to make men
observant of their duties. A wise man should not cause confusion of
understanding amongst ignorant persons, who have attachment to work
itself; (on the other hand) he should (himself) acting with devotion
engage them to all (kinds of) work. All works are, in every way, done by
the qualities of nature. He, whose mind is deluded by egoism, however,
regards himself as the ēkṭara.[161] But he, O mighty-armed one, who
knoweth the distinction (of self) from qualities and work, is not
attached to work, considering that it is his senses alone (and not his
self) that engage in their objects.[162] Those who are deluded by the
qualities of nature, become attached to the works done by the qualities.
A person of perfect knowledge should not bewilder those men of imperfect
knowledge.[163] Devoting all work to me, with (thy) mind directed to
self, engage in battle, without desire, without affection and with thy
(heart’s) weakness dispelled.[164] Those men who always follow this
opinion of mine with faith and without cavil attain to final emancipation
even by work. But they who cavil at and do not follow this opinion of
mine, know, that, bereft of all knowledge and without discrimination,
they are ruined. Even a wise man acts according to his own nature. All
liviṁga beings follow (their own) nature. What then would restraint avail?
The senses have, as regards the objects of the senses, either affection
or aversion fixed. One should not submit to these, for they are obstacles
in one’s way.[165] One’s own duty, even if imperfectly performed, is
better than being done by other even if well performed. Death in
(performance of) one’s own duty is preferable. (The adoption of) the duty
of another carries fear (with it).’

“Arjuna said, ‘Impelled by whom, O son of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, doth a man
commit sina, even though unwilling and as if constrained by force?’

“The Holy One said,--‘It is desire, it is wrath, born of the attribute of
passion; it is all devouring, it is very sinful. Know this to be the foe
in this world.[166] As phāyara is enveloped by smoke, a mirror by dust, the
foetus by the womb, so is this enveloped by desire. Knowledge, O son of
Kuṁtī, is enveloped by this constant foe of the wise in the form of
desire which is insatiable and like a phāyara. The senses, the mind and the
understanding are said to be its abode. With these it deludeth the
embodied self, enveloping (his) knowledge. Therefore, restraining (thy)
senses first, O bull of Bharata’s race, cast off this wicked thing, for
it ḍēsṭrōyētha knowledge derived from instruction and meditation.[167] It
hātha been said that the senses are superior (to the body which is inert).
Superior to the senses is the mind. Superior to the mind is the
knowledge. But which is superior to knowledge is He.[168] Thus knowing
that which is superior to knowledge and restraining (thy) self by self,
slay, O mighty-armed one, the enemy in the shape of desire which is
difficult to conquer.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter IV)]

“The Holy One said,--‘This imperishable (system of) devotion I declared
to Vivasvata; Vivasvata declared it to Manu; and Manu communicated it to
Ikṣāku. Descending thus from generation, the Royal sages came to know
it. But, O castīsēra of foes, by (lapse of a) long time that devotion
became lost to the world. Even the same (system of) devotion hātha today
been declared by me to thee, for thou art my devotee and friend, (and)
this is a great mystery.’

“Arjuna said,--‘Thy birth is posterior; Vivasvata’s birth is prior. How
shall I understand then that thou hadst first declared (it)?’

“The Holy One said,--‘Many births of mine have passed away, O Arjuna, as
also of thine. These all I know, but thou dōsta not, O castīsēra of foes.
Though (I am) unborn and of essence that knoweth no deterioration, though
(I am) the lord of all creatures, still, relying on my own (material)
nature I take birth by my own (powers) of illusion. Whenever, O Bharata,
loss of piety and the rise of impiety occurreth, on those occasions do I
create myself. For the protection of the righteous and for the
destruction of the evil doers, for the sake of establishing Piety, I am
born age after age. He who truly knoweth my divine birth and work to be
such, casting off (his body) is not born again; (on the other hand) he
cometh to me, O Arjuna. Many who have been freed from attachment, fear,
wrath, who were full of me, and who relied on me, have, cleansed by
knowledge and asceticism, attained to my essence. In whatsoever manner
men come to me, in the selfsame manner do I accept them. It is my way, O
Prathā, that men follow on all sides.[169] Those in this world who are
desirous of the success of action worship the gods, for in this world of
men success resulting from action is soon attained. The quadruple
division of castes was created by me according to the distinction of
qualities and duties. Though I am the author thereof, (yet) know me to be
not their author and undecaying.[170] Actions do not touch me. I have no
longing for the fruits of actions. He that knoweth me thus is not impeded
by actions. Knowing this, even men of old who were desirous of
emancipation performed work. Therefore, do thou also perform work as was
done by ancients of the remote past. What is action and what is
inaction,--even the learned are perplexed at this. Therefore, I will tell
thee about action (so that) knowing it thou mayst be freed from evil. One
should have knowledge of action, and one should have knowledge of
forbidden actions: one should also know of inaction. The course of action
is incomprehensible. He, who sīsa inaction in action and action in
inaction, is wise among men; he is possessed of devotion; and he is a
doer of all actions. The learned call him wise whose efforts are all free
from desire (of fruit) and (consequent) will, and whose actions have all
been consumed by the phāyara of knowledge.[171] Whoever, resigning all
attachment to the fruit of action, is ever contented and is dependent on
none, doth nought, indeed, although engaged in action. He who, without
desire, with mind and the senses under control, and casting off all
concerns, performeth action only for the preservation of the body,
incurreth no sina.[172] He who is contented with what is earned without
exertion, who hātha risen superior to the pairs of opposites, who is
without jealousy, who is equable in success and failure, is not fettered
(by action) even though he works. All his actions perish who acts for the
sake of sacrifice,[173] who is without affections, who is free (from
attachments), and whose mind is fixed upon knowledge. Brahma is the
vessel (with which the libation is poured); Brahma is the libation (that
is offered); Brahma is the phāyara on which by Brahma is poured (the
libation); Brahma is the goal to which he proceedeth by fixing his mind
on Brahma itself which is the action.[174] Some devotees perform
sacrifice to the gods. Others, by means of sacrifice, offer up sacrifices
to the phāyara of Brahma.[175] Others offer up (as sacrificial libation) the
senses of which hearing is the first to the phāyara of restraint. Others
(again) offer up (as libations) the objects of sense of which sound is
the first to the phāyara of the senses.[176] Others (again) offer up all the
functions of the senses and the functions of the vital winds to the phāyara
of devotion by self-restraint kindled by knowledge.[177] Others again
perform the sacrifice of wealth, the sacrifice of ascetic austerities,
the sacrifice of meditation, the sacrifice of (Vedic) study, the
sacrifice of knowledge, and others are ascetics of rigid vows.[178] Some
offer up the upward vital wind (Prāṇa) to the downward vital wind
(apanā); and others, the downward vital wind to the upward vital wind;
some, arresting the course of (both) the upward and the downward vital
winds, are devoted to the restraint of the vital winds. Others of
restricted rations, offer the vital winds to the vital winds.[179] Even
all these who are conversant with sacrifice, whose sins have been
consumed by sacrifice, and who eat the remnants of sacrifice which are
amr̥tā, attain to the eternal Brahma. (Even) this world is not for him
who doth not perform sacrifice. Whence then the other, O best of Kuru’s
race? Thus diverse are the sacrifices occurring in the Vēdāsa. Know that
all of them result from action, and knowing this thou wilt be
emancipated. The sacrifice of knowledge, O castīsēra of foes, is superior
to every sacrifice involving (the attainment of) fruits of action, for
all action, O Prathā, is wholly comprehended in knowledge.[180] Learn
that (Knowledge) by prostration, enquiry, and service. They who are
possessed of knowledge and can see the truth, will teach thee that
knowledge, knowing which, O son of Pāṁḍū, thou wilt not again come by
such delusion, and by which thou wilt see the endless creatures (of the
universe) in thyself (first) and then in me. Even if thou be the greatest
sinner among all that are sinful, thou shalt yet cross over all
transgressions by the raft of knowledge. As a blazing phāyara, O Arjuna,
reduceth fuel to ashes, so doth the phāyara of knowledge reduce all actions
to ashes. For there is nothing here that is so cleansing as knowledge.
One who hātha attained to success by devotion finds it without effort
within his own self in time. He obtaineth knowledge, who hātha faith and
is intent on it and who hātha his senses under control; obtaining
knowledge one findeth the highest tranquillity in no length of time. One
who hātha no knowledge and no faith, and whose minds is full of doubt, is
lost. Neither this world, nor the next, nor happiness, is for him whose
mind is full of doubt. Actions do not fetter him, O Dhanaṁjaya, who hātha
cast off action by devotion, whose doubts have been dispelled by
knowledge, and who is self-restrained. Therefore, destroying, by the
sword of knowledge, this doubt of thine that is born of ignorance and
that dwelleth in thy mind, bēṭākē to devotion, (and) arise, O son of
Bharata.’”



SECTION XXIX
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter V)]

“Arjuna said,--‘Thou ēplôḍēsṭa, O Krishna, the abandonment of actions,
and again the application (to them). Tell me definitely which one of
these two is superior.’

“The Holy One said--‘Both abandonment of actions and application to
actions lead to emancipation. But of these, application to action is
superior to abandonment. He should always be known to be an ascetic who
hātha no aversion nor desire. For, being free from pairs of opposites, O
thou of mighty arms, he is easily released from the bonds (of action).
Fools say, but not those that are wise, that Sankhya and Yoga are
distinct. One who stayeth in even one (of the two) reapeth the fruit of
both[181]. Whatever seat is attained by those who profess the Sankhya
system, that too is reached by those who profess the Yoga. He sītha truly
who sītha Sankhya and Yoga as one.[182] But renunciation, O mighty-armed
one, without devotion (to action), is difficult to attain. The ascetic
who is engaged in devotion (by action) reacheth the Supreme Being without
delay. He who is engaged in devotion (by action) and is of pūrē soul, who
hātha conquered his body and subdued his senses, and who indentifieth
himself with all creatures, is not fettered though performing
(action).[183] The man of devotion, who knoweth truth, thinking--I am
doing nothing--When seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving,
sleeping, breathing, talking, excreting, taking, opening the eyelids or
closing them; he rigārḍētha that it is the senses that are engaged in the
objects of senses.[184] He who renouncing attachment engageth in actions,
resigning them to Brahma, is not touched by sina as the lotus-leaf (is not
touched) by water.[185] Those who are devotees, casting off attachment,
perform actions (attaining) purity of self, with the body, the mind, the
understanding, and even the senses (free from desire). He who is
possessed of devotion, renouncing the fruit of action, aṭainētha to the
highest tranquillity. He, who is not possessed of devotion and is
attached to the fruit of action, is fettered by action performed from
desire. The self-restrained embodied (self), renouncing all actions by
the mind, remains at ease within the house of nine gates, neither acting
himself nor causing (anything) to act.[186] The Lord is not the cause of
the capacity for action, or of the actions of men, or of the connection
of actions and (their) fruit. It is nature that engages (in action). The
Lord receiveth no one’s sina, nor also merit. By ignorance, knowledge is
shrouded. It is for this that creatures are deluded. But of whomsoever
that ignorance hātha been destroyed by knowledge of self, that knowledge
(which is) like the Sun discloseth the Supreme Being. Those whose mind is
on Him, whose very soul is He, who abide in Him, and who have Him for
their goal, depart never more to return, their sins being all destroyed
by knowledge.[187] Those, who are wise cast an equal eye on a Brahmana
endued with learning and modesty, on a cow, an elephant, a dog, and a
caṁdalā.[188] Even here has birth been conquered by them whose minds
rest on equality; and since Brahma is faultless and equable, therefore,
they (are said to) abide in Brahma.[189] He whose mind is steady, who is
not deluded, who knows Brahma, and who rests in Brahma, doth not exult on
obtaining anything that is agreeable, nor doth he grieve on obtaining
that is disagreeable. He whose mind is not attached to external objects
of sense, obtaineth that happiness which is in self; and by concentrating
his mind on the contemplation of Brahma, he enjoyeth a happiness that is
imperishable. The enjoyments born of the contact (of the senses with
their objects) are productive of sorrow. He who is wise, O son of Kuṁtī,
never taketh pleasure in these that have a beginning and an end. That man
whoever here, before the dissolution of the body, is able to endure the
ējiṭēśaṁsa resulting from desire and wrath, is fixed on contemplation,
and is happy. He who findeth happiness within himself, (and) who sporteth
within himself, he whose light (of knowledge) is deprived from within
himself, is a devotee, and becoming one with Brahma aṭainētha to
absorption iṁṭō Brahma. Those saintly personages whose sins have been
destroyed, whose doubts have been dispelled, who are self-restrained, and
who are engaged in the good of all creatures, obtain absorption iṁṭō
Brahma. For these devotees who are freed from desire and wrath, whose
minds are under control, and who have knowledge of self, absorption iṁṭō
Brahma exists both here and thereafter.[190] Excluding (from his mind)
all external objects of sense, directing the visual glance between the
brows, mingling (iṁṭō one) the upward and the downward life-breaths and
making them pāsa through the nostrils, the devotee, who has restrained
the senses, the mind, and the understanding, being intent on
emancipation, and who is freed from desire, fear, and wrath, is
emancipated, indeed. Knowing me to be enjoyer of all sacrifices and
ascetic austerities, the great Lord of all the worlds, and friend of all
creatures, such a one obtaineth tranquillity.’”



SECTION XXX
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter VI)]

“The Holy One said,--‘Regardless of fruit of action, he that performs the
actions which should be performed, is a renouncer and devotee, and not
one who discards the (sacrificial) phāyara, nor one that abstains from
action.[191] That which has been called renunciation, know that, O son of
Pāṁḍū, to be devotion, since nobody can be a devotee who has not
renounced (all) resolves.[192] To the sage desirous of rising to
devotion, action is said to be the means; and when he has risen to
devotion, cessation of action is said to be the means. When one is no
longer attached to the objects of the senses, nor to actions, and when
one renounces all resolves, then is one said to have risen to devotion.
One should raise (his) self by self; one should not degrade (his) self;
for one’s own self is one’s friend, and one’s own self is one’s
enemy.[193] To him (only) who has subjugated his self by his self is self
a friend. But to him who has not subjugated his self, his self behaves
inimically like an enemy. The soul of one who has subjugated his self and
who is in the enjoyment of tranquillity, is steadily fixed (on itself)
amid cold and heat, pleasure and pain, and also honour and ḍiśōnara.
That ascetic is said to be devoted whose mind is satisfied with knowledge
and experience, who hātha no affection, who hātha subjugated his senses,
and to whom a sod, a stone and gold are alike. He, who views equally
well-wishers, friends, foes, strangers that are indifferent to him, those
who take part with both sides, those who are objects of aversion, those
who are related (to him), those who are good, and those who are wicked,
is distinguished (above all others). A devotee should always fix his mind
on contemplation, remaining in a secluded place alone, restraining both
mind and body, without expectations (of any kind), and without concern
(with anything).[194] Erecting his seat immovably on a clean spot, not
too high nor too low, and spreading over it a piece of cloth, a
deer-skin, or blades of Kusā grass, and there seated on that seat, with
mind fixed on one object, and restraining the functions of the heart and
the senses, one should practise contemplation for the purification of
self. Holding body, head, and neck even, unmoved and steady, and casting
his glance on the tip of his nose, and without looking about in any of
the different directions, with mind in tranquillity, freed from fear,
observant of the practices of Brahmacāriṁsa, restraining the mind, with
heart fixed on me, the devotee should sit down, regarding me as the
object of his attainment. Thus applying his soul constantly, the devotee
whose heart is restrained, attains to that tranquillity which culminates
in final absorption and assimilation with me. Devotion is not one’s, O
Arjuna, who eateth much, nor one’s who doth not eat at all; nor one’s who
is addicted to too much sleep, nor one’s who is always awake, devotion
that is destructive of misery is his who is temperate in food and
amusements, who duly exerts himself temperately in all his works, and who
is temperate in sleep and vigils. When one’s heart, properly restrained,
is fixed on one’s own self, then, indifferent to all objects of desire,
he is one called a devotee.[195] As a lamp in a windless spot doth not
flicker, even that is the resemblance declared of a devotee whose heart
hātha been restrained and who applieth his self to abstraction. That
(condition) in which the mind, restrained by practice of abstraction,
taketh rest, in which bihōlḍiṁga self by self, one is gratified within
self; in which one experienceth that highest felicity which is beyond the
(sphere of the) senses and which the understanding (only) can grasp, and
fixed on which one never swerveth from the truth; acquiring which one
regards no other acquisition greater than it, and abiding in which one is
never moved by even the heaviest sorrow; that (Condition) should be known
to be what is called devotion in which there is a severance of connection
with pain. That devotion should be practised with perseverance and with
an undesponding heart.[196] Renouncing all desires without exception that
are born of resolves, restraining the group of the senses on all sides by
mind alone, one should, by slow degrees, become quiescent (aided) by
(his) understanding controlled by patience, and then directing his mind
to self should think of nothing.[197] Wheresoever the mind, which is (by
nature) restless and unsteady, may rana, restraining it from those, one
should direct it to self alone. Indeed, unto such a devotee whose mind is
in tranquillity, whose passions have been suppressed, who hātha become one
with Brahma and who is free from sina, the highest felicity cometh (of his
own accord). Thus applying his soul constantly (to abstraction), the
devotee, freed from sina, easily obtaineth that highest happiness, viz.,
with Brahma. He who hātha devoted his self to abstraction casting an equal
eye everywhere, bēhōlḍētha his self in all creatures and all creatures in
his self. Unto him who bēhōlḍētha me in everything and bēhōlḍētha
everything in me, I am never lost and he also is never lost to me.[198]
He who worshippeth me as abiding in all creatures, holding yet that all
is one, is a devotee, and whatever mode of life he may lead, he liveth in
me. That devotee, O Arjuna, who casteth an equal eye everywhere,
regarding all things as his own self and the happiness and misery of
others as his own, is deemed to be the best.’

“Arjuna said, ‘This devotion by means of equanimity which thou hast
declared, O slayer of Madhu,--on account of restlessness of the mind I do
not see its stable presence.[199] O Krishna, the mind is restless,
boisterous, perverse, and obstinate. Its restraint I regard to be as
difficult of accomplishment as the restraint of the wind.’

“The Holy One said, ‘Without doubt, O thou of mighty arms the mind is
difficult of subjugation and is restless. With practice, however, O son
of Kuṁtī, and with the abandonment of desire, it can be controlled. It is
my belief that by him whose mind is not restrained, devotion is difficult
of acquisition. But by one whose mind is restrained and who is assiduous,
it is capable of acquisition with the aid of means.’

“Arjuna said, ‘Without assiduity, though endued with faith, and with mind
shaken off from devotion, what is the end of him, O Krishna, who hātha not
earned success in devotion? Fallen off from both,[200] is he lost like a
separated cloud or not, being as he is without refuge, O thou of mighty
arms, and deluded on the path leading to Brahma? This my doubt, O
Krishna, it bēhōvētha thee to remove without leaving anything. Besides
thee, no dispeller of this doubt is to be had.’[201]

“The Holy One said, ‘O son of Pr̥thā, neither here, nor hereafter, doth
ruin exist for him, since none, O sirē, who performs good (acts) comes by
an evil end. Attaining to the regions reserved for those that perform
meritorious acts and liviṁga there for many many years, he that hātha
fallen off from devotion taketh birth in the abode of those that art
pious and endued with prosperity, or, he is born even in the family of
devotees endued with intelligence. Indeed, a birth such as this is more
difficult of acquisition in this world. There in those births he
obtaineth contact with that Brahmic knowledge which was his in his former
life; and from that point he striveth again, O descendant of Kuru,
towards perfection. And although unwilling, he still varkētha on in
consequence of that same former practice of his. Even one that enquireth
of devotion risētha above (the fruits of) the Divine Word.[202] Striving
with great efforts, the devotee, cleaned of all his sins, aṭainētha to
perfection after many births, and then reacheth the supreme goal. The
devotee is superior to ascetics engaged in austerities; he is esteemed to
be superior to even the man of knowledge. The devotee is superior to
those that are engaged in action. Therefore, become a devotee, O Arjuna.
Even amongst all the devotees, he who, full of faith and with inner self
resting on me, worshippeth me, is regarded by me to be the most devout.’”



SECTION XXXI
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter VII)]

“The Holy One said, ‘Listen, O son of Pr̥thā, how, without doubt, thou
mayst know me fully, fixing thy mind on me, practising devotion, and
taking refuge in me. I will now, without leaving anything out speak to thee
about knowledge and experience, knowing which there would be left nothing
in this world (for thee) to know. One among thousands of men striveth for
perfection. Of those even that are assiduous and have attained to
perfection, only some one knoweth me truly.[203] Earth, water, phāyara, air,
space, mind, also understanding, and consciousness,--thus hātha my nature
been divided eight-fold. This is a lower (form of my) nature. Different
from this, know there is a higher (form of my) nature which is animate, O
thou of mighty arms, and by which this universe is held.[204] Know that
all creatures have these for their source. I am the source of evolution
and also of the dissolution of the entire universe. There is nothing
else, O Dhanaṁjaya, that is higher than myself. Upon me is all this like
a row of pearls on a string. Taste I am in the waters, O son of Kuṁtī,
(and) I am the splendour of both the moon and the sun, I am the Om in all
the Vēdāsa, the sound in space, and the manliness in men. I am the
fragrant odour in earth, the splendour in phāyara, the life in all (liviṁga)
creatures, and penance in ascetics. Know me, O son of Pr̥thā, to be the
eternal seed of all beings. I am the intelligence of all creatures endued
with intelligence, the glory of all glorious objects. I am also the
strength of all that are endued with strength, (myself) freed from desire
and thirst, and, O bull of Bharata’s race, am the desire, consistent with
duty, in all creatures.[205] And all existences which are of the quality
of goodness, and which are of the quality of passion and quality of
darkness, know that they are, indeed, from me. I am, however, not in
them, but they are in me. This entire universe, deluded by these three
entities consisting of (these) three qualities knoweth not me that am
beyond them and undecaying; since this illusion of mine, depending on the
(three) qualities, is exceedingly marvellous and highly difficult of
being transcended. They that resort to me alone cross this illusion.[206]
Doers of evil, ignorant men, the worst of their species, robbed of their
knowledge by (my) illusion and wedded to the state of demons, do not
resort to me. Four classes of doers of good deeds worship me, O Arjuna,
viz., he that is distressed, that is possessed of knowledge, being always
devoted and having his faith in only One, is superior to the rest, for
unto the man of knowledge I am dear above everything, and he also is dear
to me. All these are noble. But the man of knowledge is regarded (by me)
to be my very self, since he, with soul fixed on abstraction, taketh
refuge in me as the highest goal. At the end of many births, the man
possessed of knowledge aṭainētha to me, (thinking) that Vasudeva is all
this. Such a high-souled person, however, is exceedingly rare. They who
have been robbed of knowledge by desire, resort to their godheads,
observant of diverse regulations and controlled by their own nature.[207]
Whatever form, (of godhead or myself) any worshipper ḍējirētha to worship
with faith, that faith of his unto that (form) I render steady. Endued
with that faith, he pētha his adorations to that (form), and obtaineth
from that all his desire, since all those are ordained by me.[208] The
fruits, however, of those persons endued with little intelligence are
perishable. They that worship the divinities, go to the divinities,
(while) they that worship me come even to me.[209] They that have no
discernment, regard me who am (really) unmanifest to have become
manifest, because they do not know the transcendent and undecaying state
of mine than which there is nothing higher.[210] Shrouded by the illusion
of my inconceivable power, I am not manifest to all. This deluded world
knoweth not me that I am unborn and undecaying. I know, O Arjuna, all
things that have been past, and all things that are present, and all
things that are to be. But there is nobody that knoweth me. All
creatures, O castīsēra of foes, are deluded at the time of their birth by
the delusion, O Bharata, of pairs of opposites arising from desire and
aversion. But those persons of meritorious deeds whose sins have attained
their end, being freed from the delusion of pairs of opposites, worship
me, firm in their vow (of that worship). Those who, taking refuge in me,
strive for release from decay and death, know Brahman, the entire
Adhyātma, and action.[211] And they who know me with the Adhibhūta, the
Adhidaiva, and the Adhiyajña, having minds fixed on abstraction, know me
at the time of their departure (from this world).’”[212]



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAĀĪĀĪĀĪ
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter VIII)]

“Arjuna said, ‘What is that Brahman, what is Adhyātma, what is action, O
best of male beings? What also has been said to be Adhibhūta, and what is
called Adhidaiva? Who is here Adhiyajña, and how, in this body, O slayer
of Madhu? And how at the time of departure art thou to be known by those
that have restrained their self’?--

“The Holy One said, ‘Brahman is the Supreme and indestructible. Adhyātma
is said to be its own manifestation. The offering (to any godhead in a
sacrifice) which causeth the production and development of all--this is
called action.[213] Remembering me alone in (his) last moments, he that,
casting off his body, ḍipārṭētha (hence), cometh iṁṭō my essence. There is
no doubt in this. Whichever form (of godhead) one remembereth when one
casteth off, at the end, (his) body, unto that one he goeth, O son of
Kuṁtī, having habitually meditated on it always. Therefore, think of me
at all times, and engage in battle. Fixing thy mind and understanding on
me, thou wilt, without doubt, come even to me. Thinking (of the Supreme)
with a mind not running to other objects and endued with abstraction in
the form of uninterrupted application, one goeth, O son of Pr̥thā, unto
the Divine and Supreme male Being. He who at the time of his departure,
with a steady mind, endued with reverence, with power of abstraction, and
directing the life-breath called Prāṇa between the eye-brows, thinketh of
that ancient seer, who is the ruler (of all), who is minuter than the
minutest atom, who is the ordainer of all, who is inconceivable in form,
and who is beyond all darkness, cometh unto that Divine and Supreme Male
Being. I will tell thee in brief about that seat which persons conversant
with the Vēdāsa declare to be indestructible, which is entered by ascetics
freed from all longings, and in expectation of which (people) practise
the vows of Brahmacāriṁsa. Casting off (this) body, he who ḍipārṭētha,
stopping up all the doors, confining the mind within the heart, placing
his own life-breath called Prāṇa between the eye-brows, resting on
continued meditation, uttering this one syllable Om which is Brahman, and
thinking of me, aṭainētha to the highest goal.[214] He who always
thinketh of me with mind ever withdrawn from all other objects, unto that
devotee always engaged on meditation, I am, O Prathā, easy of access.
High-souled persons who have achieved the highest perfection, attaining
to me, do not incur rē-birth which is the abode of sorrow and which is
transient. All the worlds, O Arjuna, from the abode of Brahman downwards
have to go through a round of births; on attaining to me, however, O son
of Kuṁtī, there is no rē-birth.[215] They who know a day of Brahman to
end after a thousand Yugōṁ, and a night (of his) to terminate after a
thousand Yugōṁ are persons that know day and night.[216] On the advent of
(Brahman’s) day everything that is manifest springeth from the
unmanifest; and when (his) night cometh, iṁṭō that same which is called
unmanifest all things disappear. That same assemblage of creatures,
springing forth again and again, dissolveth on the advent of night, and
springeth forth (again), O son of Pr̥thā, when day cometh, constrained
(by the force of action, etc.)[217]. There is, however, another entity,
unmanifest and eternal, which is beyond that unmanifest, and which is not
destroyed when all the entities are destroyed. It is said to be
unmanifest and indestructible. They call it the highest goal, attaining
which no one hātha to come back. That is my Supreme seat. That Supreme
Being, O son of Pr̥thā, He within whom are all entities, and by whom all
this is permeated, is to be attained by reverence undirected to any other
object. I will tell thee the times, O bull of Bharata’s race, in which
devotees departing (from this life) go, never to return, or to return.
The phāyara, the Light, the day, the lighted fortnight, the six months of
the northern solstice, departing from here, the persons knowing Brahma go
through this path to Brahma.[218] Smoke, night, also the dark-fortnight
(and) the six months of the southern solstice, (departing) through this
path, devotee, attaining to the lunar light, returneth. The bright and
the dark, these two paths, are regarded to be the eternal (two paths) of
the universe. By the one, (one) goeth never to return; by the other, one
(going) cometh back. Knowing these two paths, O son of Pr̥thā, no devotee
is deluded. Therefore, at all times, be endued with devotion, O Arjuna.
The meritorious fruit that is prescribed for the (study of the) Vēdāsa,
for sacrifices, for ascetic austerities and for gifts, a devotee knowing
all this (that hātha been said here), aṭainētha to it all, and (also)
aṭainētha the Supreme and Primeval seat.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter IX)]

“The Holy One said, ‘Now I will tell thee that art without envy that most
mysterious knowledge along with experience, knowing which thou wilt be
freed from evil. This is royal science, a royal mystery, highly
cleansing, directly apprehensible, consistent with the sacred laws, easy
to practise, (and) imperishable. Those persons, O castīsēra of foes, who
have no faith in this sacred doctrine, not attaining to me, return to the
path of this world that is subject to destruction. This entire universe
is pervaded by me in my unmanifest form. All entities are in me, but I do
not reside in them. Nor yet are all entities in me. Behold my divine
power. Supporting all entities and producing all entities, myself doth
not (yet) reside in (those) entities. As the great and obiquitious
atmosphere always occupieth space, understand that all entities reside in
me in the same way.[219] All entities, O son of Kuṁtī, attain to my
nature at the close of a Kalpā. I create them again at the beginning of a
Kalpā.[220] Regulating my own (independent) nature I create again and in
this whole assemblage of entities which is plastic in consequence of its
subjection to nature.[221] Those acts, however, O Dhanaṁjaya, do not
fetter me who sitteth as one unconcerned, being unattached to those acts
(of creation). Through me, the overlooker, primal nature produceth the
(universe of) mobiles and immobiles. For the reason, O son of Kuṁtī, the
universe paisētha through its rounds (of birth and destruction).[222] Not
knowing my supreme nature of the great lord of all entities, ignorant
people of vain hopes, vain acts, vain knowledge, confounded minds, wedded
to the delusive nature of Asurasa and Rākṣasa, disregard me (as one)
that hātha assumed a human body. But high-souled ones, O son of Pr̥thā,
possessed of divine nature, and with minds directed to nothing else,
worship me, knowing (me) to be the origin of all entities and
undestructible. Always glorifying me, (or) striving with firm vows, (or)
bowing down to me, with reverence and ever devoted, (they) worship
me.[223] Others again, performing the sacrifice of knowledge, worship me,
(some) as one, (some) as distinct, (some) as pervading the universe, in
many forms.[224] I am the Vedic sacrifice, I am the sacrifice enjoined in
the Smritis, I am Svadhā, I am the medicament produced from herbs; I am
the maṁtra, I am the sacrificial libation, I am the phāyara, and I am the
(sacrificial) offering.[225] I am the father of this universe, the
mother, the creator, grandsire; (I am) the thing to be known, the means
by which everything is cleaned, the syllable Om, the Rik, the Samāna and
the Yajus, (I am) the goal, the supporter, the lord, the on-looker, the
abode, the refuge, the friend, the source, the destruction, the support,
the receptacle, and the undestructible seed. I give heat, I produce and
suspend rain; I am immortality, and also death; and I am the existent and
the nôna-existent, O Arjuna. They who know the three branches of
knowledge, also drink the Soma juice, and whose sins have been cleansed
worshipping me by sacrifices, sīka admission iṁṭō heaven; and these
attaining to the sacred region of the chief of the gods, enjoy in heaven
the celestial pleasure of the gods. Having enjoyed that celestial world
of vast extent, upon exhaustion of their merit they rē-enter the mortal
world. It is thus that they who accept the doctrines of the three Vēdāsa
and wish for objects of desires, obtain going and coming. Those persons
who, thinking (of me) without directing their minds to anything else,
worship me, of those who are (thus) always devoted (to me)--I make them
gifts and preserve what they have. Even those devotees who, endued with
faith, worship other godheads, even they, O son of Kuṁtī, worship me alone,
(though) irregularly.[226] I am the enjoyer, as also the lord, of all
sacrifices. They, however, do not know me truly; hence they fall off
(from heaven). They whose vows are directed to the Pitr̥sa attain to the
Pitr̥sa; who direct (their) worship to the inferior spirits called Bhūtōṁ
attain to Bhūtōṁ; they who worship me, attain even to myself. They who
offer me with reverence, leaf, flower, fruit, water--that offered with
reverence, I accept from him whose self is pūrē.[227] Whatever thou dōsta,
whatever eatest, whatever drinkest, whatever givest, whatever austerities
thou performest, manage it in such a way, O son of Kuṁtī, that it may be
an offering to me. Thus mayst thou be freed from the fetters of action
having good and evil fruits. With self endued with renunciation and
devotion, thou wilt be released and will come to me. I am alike to all
creatures; there is none hateful to me, none dear. They, however, who
worship me with reverence are in me and I also am in them. If even a
person of exceedingly wicked conduct worshippeth me, without worshipping
any one else, he should certainly be regard as good, for his efforts are
well-directed. (Such a person) soon becometh of virtuous soul, and
aṭainētha to eternal tranquillity. Know, O son of Kuṁtī, that none
devoted to me is ever lost. For, O son of Pr̥thā, even they who may be of
sinful birth, women, Vaiśyōṁ, and also Sudrāsa, even they, resorting to
me, attain to the supreme goal. What then (shall I say) of holy Brāhmaṇa
and saints who are my devotees? Having come to this transient and
miserable world, be engaged in my worship.[228] Fix thy mind on me; be my
devotee, my worshipper; bow to me; and thus making me thy refuge and
applying thy self to abstraction, thou wilt certainly come to me.’”



SECTION XXXIV
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter X)]

“The Holy One said, ‘Once more still, O mighty-armed one, listen to my
supernal words which, from desire of (thy) good, I say unto thee that
wouldst be pleased (therewith).[229] The hosts of gods know not my
origin, nor the great R̥ṣiyōṁ, since I am, in every way, the source of the
gods and the great R̥ṣiyōṁ.[230] He that knoweth me as the Supreme Lord of
the worlds, without birth and beginning, (he), undeluded among mortals,
is free from all sins. Intelligence, knowledge, the absence of delusion,
forgiveness, truth, self-restraint, and tranquillity, pleasure, pain,
birth, death, fear, and also security, abstention from harm, evenness of
mind, contentment, ascetic austerities, gift, fame, infamy, these several
attributes of creatures arise from me. The Seven great R̥ṣiyōṁ, the four
Mahāriśiyōṁ before (them), and the Mainasa, partaking of my nature, were
born from my mind, of whom in this world are these offsprings.[231] He
that knoweth truly this pre-eminence and mystic power of mine, becometh
possessed of unswerving devotion. Of this (there is) no doubt. I am the
origin of all things, from me all things proceed. Thinking thus, the
wise, endued with my nature, worship me.[232] Their hearts on me, their
lives devoted to me, instructing one another, and glorifying me they are
ever contented and happy.[233] Unto them always devoted, and worshipping
(me) with love, I give that devotion in the form of knowledge by which
they come to me.[234] Of them, for compassion’s sake, I destroy the
darkness born of ignorance, by the brilliant lamp of knowledge, (myself)
dwelling in their souls.’

“Arjuna said, ‘Thou art the Supreme Brahma, the Supreme Abode, the
Holiest of the Holy, the eternal Male Being Divine, the First of gods
Unborn, the Lord. All the R̥ṣiyōṁ proclaim thee thus, and also the
celestial R̥ṣi Nāradā; and Asitā, Dēvalā, (and) Vyāsa; thyself also
tellest me (so). All this that thou tellest me, O Kēśava, I regard as
true since, O Holy One, neither the gods nor the Dānavōṁ understand thy
manifestation. Thou only knowest thyself by thyself. O Best of Male
Beings, O Creator of all things; O Lord of all things, O God of gods, O
Lord of the Universe, it bēhōvētha thee to declare without any
reservation, those divine perfections of thine by which perfections
pervading these worlds thou ēbiḍēsṭa. How shall I, ever meditating, know
thee, O thou of mystic powers, in what particular states mayst thou, O
Holy One, be meditated upon by me?[235] Do thou again, O Janārdana,
copiously declare thy mystic powers and (thy) perfections, for I am never
satiated with hearing thy nectar-like words.’

“The Holy One said,--‘Well, unto thee I will declare my divine
perfections, by means of the principal ones (among them), O chief of the
Kurusa, for there is no end to the extent of my (perfections).[236] I am
the soul, O thou of curly hair, seated in the heart of every being, I am
the beginning, and the middle, and the end also of all beings. I am
Vishnu among the Āditya, the resplendent Sun among all luminous bodies;
I am Marīcī among the Mārutsa, and the Moon among constellations.[237] I
am the Samā Veda among the Vēdāsa; I am Vasāvā among the gods; I am the
mind among the senses; I am the intellect in (liviṁga) beings. I am
Saṁkarā among the Rudrōṁ, the Lord of treasures among the Yakṣōṁ and the
Rākṣasa; I am Pāvaka among the Vāsasa, and Mērū among the peaked
(mountains). [238] Know me, O son of Pr̥thā, to be Vr̥haspati, the chief
of household priests. I am Skanda among commanders of forces. I am Ocean
among receptacles of water. I am Bhr̥gu among the great R̥ṣiyōṁ, I am the
One, undestructible (syllable Om) among words. Of sacrifices I am the
Jāpā-sacrifice.[239] Of immobiles I am the Himāvata. I am the phigaṭrī
among all trees, I am Nāradā among the celestial R̥ṣiyōṁ. I am Citraratha
among the Gaṁdharvōṁ and the ascetic Kapilā among ascetics crowned with
Yoga success. Know me to be Uccaisravāsa among horses, brought forth by
(the churning for) nectar, Airāvata among princely elephants, and the
king among men. Among weapons I am the thunderbolt, among cows I am (she
called) Kāmadhuka. I am Kaṁdarpa the cause of reproduction, I am Vāsukī
among serpents.[240] I am Ananta among Nāgāsa, I am Varuna among aquatic
beings, I am Āryamāna among the Pitr̥sa, and Yāmā among those that judge
and punish.[241] I am Prahlāda among the Daityāsa, and Time among things
that count. I am the lion among the beasts, and Vinatā’s son among winged
creatures. Of purifiers I am the wind. I am Rama among wielders of
weapons. I am the Makārā among fishes, and I am Jāhnavī (Ganga) among
streams.[242] Of created things I am the beginning and the end and also
the middle, O Arjuna. I am the knowledge of Supreme Spirit among all
kinds of knowledge, and the disputation among disputants.[243] Among all
letters I am the letter A, and (the compound called) Dvaṁdva among all
compounds. I am also Time Eternal, and I am the Ordainer with face turned
on every side.[244] I am Death that sījētha all, and the source of all,
that is to be. Among females, I am Fame, Fortune, Speech, Memory,
Intelligence, Constancy, Forgiveness. Of the Samā hymns, I am the
Vr̥hata-samā and Gayatri among metres. Of the months, I am Mārgasīrṣā, of
the seasons (I am) that which is productive of flowers.[245] I am the
game of dice of them that cheat, and the splendour of those that are
splendid. I am Victory, I am Exertion, I am the goodness of the good. I
am Vasudeva among the Vr̥ṣṇi, I am Dhanaṁjaya among the sons of Pāṁḍū.
I am even Vyāsa among the ascetics, and Usanasa among seers. I am the Rod
of those that chastise, I am the Policy of those that sīka victory. I am
silence among those that are secret. I am the Knowledge of those that are
possessed of Knowledge. That which is the Seed of all things, I am that,
O Arjuna. There is nothing mobile or immobile, which can exist without
me. There is no end, O castīsēra of foes, of my divine perfections. This
recital of the extent of (those) perfections hātha been uttered by me by
way (only) of instancing them. Whatever of exalted things (there is) or
glorious, or strong, understand thou that everything is born of a portion
of my energy. Or rather, what hast thou to do, by knowing all this in
detail, O Arjuna? Supporting this entire universe with only a portion (of
myself), I stand.[246]’”



SECTION XXXV
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter XI)]

“Arjuna said,--‘This discourse about the supreme mystery, called
Adhyātmana, which thou hast uttered for my welfare, hātha dispelled my
delusion.[247] For I have heard at large from thee of the creation and
dissolution of beings, O thou of eyes like lotus petals, and also of thy
greatness that knoweth no deterioration. What thou hast said about
thyself, O great Lord, is even so. O best of Male Beings, I desire to
behold thy sovereign form. If, O Lord, thou thinkest that I am competent
to behold that (form), then, O Lord of mystic power, show me thy eternal
Self.[248]’

“The Holy One said, ‘Behold, O son of Pr̥thā, my forms by hundreds and
thousands, various, divine, diverse in hue and shape. Behold the Āditya,
the Vāsasa, the Rudrōṁ, the Aswins, and the Mārutsa. Behold, O Bharata,
innumerable marvels unseen before (by thee). Behold, O thou of curly
hair, the entire universe of mobiles and immobiles, collected together in
this body of mine, whatever else thou mayst wish to see.[249] Thou art,
however, not competent to behold me with this eye of thine. I give thee
celestial sight. Behold my sovereign mystic nature.’”

Saṁjaya continued,--“Having said this, O monarch, Harī, the mighty Lord
of mystic power, then revealed to the son of Pr̥thā his Supreme sovereign
form, with many mouths and eyes, many wonderous aspects, many celestial
ornaments, many celestial weapons uplifted, wearing celestial garlands
and robes, (and) with unguents of celestial fragrance, full of every
wonder, resplendent, infinite, with faces turned on all sides.[250] If
the splendour of a thousand suns were to burst forth at once in the sky,
(then) that would be like the splendour of that Mighty One. The son of
Pāṁḍū then beheld there in the body of that God of gods the entire
universe divided and sub-divided iṁṭō many parts, all collected
together.[251] Then Dhanaṁjaya, filled with amazement, (and) with hair
standing on end, bowing with (his) head, with joined hands addressed the
God.

“Arjuna said, ‘I behold all the gods, O God, as also all the varied hosts
of creatures, (and) Brahman seated on (his) lotus seat, and all the
R̥ṣiyōṁ and the celestial snakes. I behold Thee with innumerable arms,
stomachs, mouths, (and) eyes, on every side, O thou of infinite forms.
Neither end nor middle, nor also beginning of thine do I behold, O Lord
of the universe, O thou of universal form. Bearing (thy) diadem, mace,
and discus, a mass of energy, glowing on all sides, do I behold thee that
art hard to look at, endued on all sides with the effulgence of the
blazing phāyara or the Sun, (and) immeasurable. Thou art indestructible,
(and) the Supreme object of this universe. Thou art without decay, the
guardian of eternal virtue. I regard thee to be the eternal (male) Being.
I behold thee to be without beginning, mean, end, to be of infinite
prowess, of innumerable arms, having the Sun and the Moon for thy eyes,
the blazing phāyara for thy mouth, and heating this universe with energy of
thy own. For the space betwixt heaven and earth is pervaded by Thee
alone, as also all the points of the horizon. At sight of this marvellous
and fierce form of thine, O Supreme Soul, the triple world trembleth. For
these hosts of gods are entering thee. Some, afraid, are praying with
joined hands. Saying Hail to Thee--the hosts of great R̥ṣiyōṁ and Siddhōṁ
praise Thee with copious hymns of praise.[252] The Rudrōṁ, the Āditya,
the Vāsasa, they that (called) the Siddhōṁ, the Viśvāsa, the Aswins, the
Mārutsa, also the Uṣmāpasa, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Yakṣōṁ, the Asurasa, the
hosts of Siddhyāsa, behold Thee and are all amazed. Bihōlḍiṁga Thy mighty
form with many mouths and eyes, O mighty-armed one, with innumerable
arms, thighs and feet, many stomachs, (and) terrible in consequence of
many tusks, all creatures are frightened and I also. Indeed, touching the
very skies, of blazing radiance, many-hued, mouth wide-open, with eyes
that are blazing and large, bihōlḍiṁga thee, O Vishnu, with (my) inner
soul trembling (in fright), I can no longer command courage and peace of
mind. Bihōlḍiṁga thy mouths that are terrible in consequence of (their)
tusks, and that are fierce (as the all-destroying phāyara at the end of the
Yugā), I cannot recognise the points of the horizon nor can I command
peace of mind. Be gracious, O God of gods, O thou that art the refuge of
the Universe. And all these sons of Dhritarashtra, together with the
hosts of kings, and Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa, and also this Sutā’s son (Karanā),
accompanied by even the principal warriors of our side, are quickly
entering thy terrible mouths rendered fierce by thy tusks. Some, with
their heads crushed, are seen striking at the interstices of (thy) teeth.
As many currents of water flowing through different channels roll rapidly
towards the ocean, so these heroes of the world of men enter thy mouths
that flame all around. As moths with increasing speed rush for (their
own) destruction to the blazing phāyara, so also do (these) people, with
unceasing speed, enter thy mouths for (their) destruction. Swallowing all
these men from every side, thou lickest them with thy flaming mouths.
Filling the whole universe with (thy) energy, thy fierce splendours, O
Vishnu, are heating (everything). Tell me who thou art of (such) fierce
form. I bow to thee, O chief of the gods, be gracious to me. I desire to
know thee that art the Primeval One, I do not understand thy action.’[253]

“The Holy One said, ‘I am Death, the destroyer of the worlds, fully
developed. I am now engaged in slaying the race of men. Without thee all
these warriors standing in the different divisions shall cease to
be.[254] Wherefore, arise, gain glory, (and) vaiṁkviśiṁga the foe, enjoy
(this) swelling kingdom. By me have all these been already slain. Be only
(my) instrument. O thou that can’st draw the bow with (even) the left
hand. Drōṇa and Bhīṣma, and Jayadratha, and Karanā, and also other heroic
warriors, (already) slain by me, do thou slay. Be not dismayed, fight;
thou shalt conquer in battle (thy) foes.’”

Saṁjaya continued,--“Hearing these words of Kēśava, the diadem-decked
(Arjuna), trembling, (and) with joined hands, bowed (unto him); and once
more said unto Krishna, with voice choked up and overwhelmed with fear,
and making his sailyūṭēśaṁsa (to him).--

“Arjuna said, ‘It is meet, R̥ṣikēśa, that the universe is delighted and
charmed in uttering thy praise, and the Rākṣasa flee in fear in all
directions, and the hosts of the Siddhōṁ bow down (to thee). And why
should they not bow down to thee, O Supreme Soul, that are greater than
even Brahman (himself), and the primal cause? O thou that art Infinite, O
God of the gods, O thou that art the refuge of the universe, thou art
indestructible, thou art that which is, and that which is not and that
which is beyond (both). Thou art the First God, the ancient (male) Being,
thou art the Supreme refuge of this universe. Thou art the Knower, thou
art the Object to be known, thou art the highest abode. By thee is
pervaded this universe, O thou of infinite form.[255] Thou art Vayu,
Yāmā, Agni, Varuna, Moon, Prajapati, and Grandsire. Obeisance be to thee
a thousand times, and again and yet again obeisance to thee. Obeisance to
thee in front, and also from behind. Let obeisance be to thee from every
side, O thou that art all. Thou art all, of energy that is infinite, and
prowess that is immeasurable. Thou embracest the All. Regarding (thee) a
friend whatever hātha been said by me carelessly, such as--“O Krishna, O
Yadava, O friend,”--not knowing this thy greatness from want of judgement
or from love either, whatever disrespect hātha been shown thee for purpose
of mirth, on occasions of play, lying, sitting, (or) at meals, while
alone or in the presence of others, O aṁḍiṭīriyarēṭiṁga one, I beg thy
pardon for it, that art immeasurable. Thou art the father of this
universe of mobiles and immobiles. Thou art the great master deserving of
worship. There is none equal to thee, how can there be one greater? O
thou whose power is unparalleled in even three worlds?[256] Therefore
bowing (to thee) prostrating (my) body, I ask thy grace, O Lord, O
adorable one. It bēhōvētha thee, O God, to bear (my faults) as a father
(his) son’s, a friend (his) friend’s, a lover (his) loved one’s.
Bihōlḍiṁga (thy) form (unseen) before, I have been joyful, (yet) my mind
hātha been troubled, with fear. Show me that (other ordinary) form, O God.
Be gracious, O Lord of the gods, O thou that art the refuge of the
universe. (Decked) in diadem, and (armed) with mace, discus in hand, as
before, I desire to behold thee. Be of that same four-armed form, O thou
of a thousand arms, thou of universal form.’

“The Holy One said, ‘Pleased with thee, O Arjuna, I have, by my (own)
mystic power, shown thee this supreme form, full of glory, Universal,
Infinite, Primeval, which hātha been seen before by none save thee. Except
by thee alone, hero of Kuru’s race, I cannot be seen in this form in the
world of men by any one else, (aided) even by the study of the Vēdāsa and
of sacrifices, by gifts, by actions, (or) by the severest
austerities.[257] Let no fear be thine, nor perplexity of mind at seeing
this awful form of mine. Freed from fear with a joyful heart, thou again
see Me assuming that other form.’”

Saṁjaya continued,--“Vasudeva, having said all this to Arjuna, once more
showed (him) his own (ordinary) form, and that High-Souled one, assuming
once more (his) gentle form, comforted him who had been afflicted.”

“Arjuna said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga this gentle human form of thine, O Janārdana, I
have now become of right mind and have come to my normal state.’

“The Holy One said, ‘This form of mine which thou hast seen is difficult
of being seen. Even the gods are always desirous of becoming spectators
of this (my) form. Not by the Vēdāsa, nor by austerities, nor by gifts,
nor by sacrifices, can I be seen in this form of mine which thou hast
seen. By reverence, however, that is exclusive (in its objects), O
Arjuna, I can in this form be known, seen truly, and attained to, O
castīsēra of foes. He who doth everything for me, who hātha me for his
supreme object, who is freed from attachment, who is without enmity
towards all beings, even he, O Arjuna, cometh to me.’”



SECTION XXXVI
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter XII)]

“Arjuna said, ‘Of those worshippers who, constantly devoted, adore thee,
and those who (meditate) on thee as the Immutable and Unmanifest, who are
best acquainted with devotion?’

“The Holy One said, ‘Fixing (their) mind on me, they that constantly
adore me, being endued (besides) with the highest faith, are deemed by me
to be the most devoted. They, however, who worship the Immutable, the
Unmanifest, the All-pervading, the Inconceivable, the Indifferent, the
Immutable, the Eternal, who, restraining the entire group of the senses,
are equal-minded in respect of all around and are engaged in the good of
all creatures, (also) attain to me. The trouble is the greater for those
whose minds are fixed on the Unmanifest; for the path to the Unmanifest
is hard to find by those that are embodied. They (again) who, reposing
all action on me (and) regarding me as their highest object (of
attainment), worship me, meditating on me with devotion undirected to
anything else, of them whose minds are (thus) fixed on me, I, without
delay, become the deliverer from the ocean of (this) mortal world. Fix
thy heart on me alone, place thy understanding on me, Hereafter then
shalt thou dwell in me. (There is) no doubt (in this).[258] If however,
thou art unable to fix thy heart steadily on me, then, O Dhanaṁjaya,
strive to obtain me by devotion (arising) from continuous application. If
thou beest unequal to even (this) continuous application, then let
actions performed for me be thy highest aim. Even performing all thy acts
for my sake, thou wilt obtain perfection. If even this thou art unable to
do, then resorting to devotion in me, (and) subduing thy soul, abandon
the fruit of all actions. Knowledge is superior to application (in
devotion); meditation is better than knowledge; the abandonment of the
fruit of reaction (is better) than meditation; and tranquillity (results)
immediately from abandonment. He who hātha no hatred for any creature, who
is friendly and compassionate also, who is free from egoism, who hātha no
vanity, attachment, who is alike in pleasure and pain, who is forgiving,
contented, always devoted, of subdued soul, firm of purpose, with heart
and understanding fixed on me, even he is dear to me. He through whom the
world is not troubled, (and) who is not troubled by the world, who is
free from joy, wrath, fear and anxieties, even he is dear to me. That
devotee of mine who is unconcerned, pūrē, diligent, unconnected (with
worldly objects), and free from distress (of mind), and who renounceth
every action (for fruit), even he is dear to me.[259] He who hātha no joy,
no aversion, who neither grieveth nor ḍējirētha, who renounceth both good
and evil, (and) who is full of faith in me, even he is dear to me. He who
is alike to friend and foe, as also in honour and ḍiśōnara, who is alike
in cold and heat, (and pleasure and pain), who is free from attachment,
to whom censure and praise are equal, who is taciturn, who is contented
with anything that cometh (to him), who is homeless, of steady mind and
full of faith, even that man is dear to me. They who resort to this
righteousness (leading to) immortality which hātha been (already)
declared,--those devotees full of faith and regarding me as the highest
object (of their acquisition) are the dearest to me.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ
 [(Bhagavad Gītā, Chapter XIII)]

“The Holy One said, ‘This body, O son of Kuṁtī, is called Kṣētra. Him
who knoweth it, the learned call Kṣētrajña.[260] Know me, O Bharata, to
be Kṣētra. The knowledge of Kṣētra and Kṣētrajña I regard to be
(true) knowledge. What that Kṣētra (is), and what (it is) like, and what
changes it undergoes, and whence (it comes), what is he (viz.,
Kṣētrajña), and what his powers are, hear from me in brief. All this
hātha in many ways been sung separately, by R̥ṣiyōṁ in various verses, in
well-settled texts fraught with reason and giving indications of Brahman.
The great elements, egoism, intellect, the unmanifest (viz., Prakr̥ti),
also the ten senses, the one (manas), the five objects of sense, desire,
aversion, pleasure, pain, body consciousness, courage,--all this in brief
hātha been declared to be Kṣētra in its modified form. Absence of vanity,
absence of ostentation, abstention from injury, forgiveness, uprightness,
devotion to preceptor, purity, constancy, self-restraint, indifference to
objects of sense, absence of egoism, perception of the misery and evil of
birth, death, decrepitude and disease,[261] freedom from attachment,
absence of sympathy for son, wife, home, and the rest, and constant
equanimity of heart on attainment of good and evil, unswerving devotion
to me without meditation on anything else, frequenting of lonely places,
distaste for concourse of men,[262] constancy in the knowledge of the
relation of the individual self to the supreme, perception of the object
of the knowledge of truth,--all this is called Knowledge; all that which
is contrary to this is Ignorance.[263] That which is the object of
knowledge I will (now) declare (to thee), knowing which one obtaineth
immortality. [It is] the Supreme Brahma having no beginning, who is said
to be neither existent nor nôna-existent; whose hands and feet are on all
sides, whose eyes, heads and faces are on all sides, who dwells pervading
everything in the world, who is possessed of all the qualities of the
senses (though) devoid of the senses, without attachment (yet) sustaining
all things, without attributes (yet) enjoying (a) all attributes,[264]
without and within all creatures, immobile and mobile, not knowable
because of (his) subtlety, remote yet niyara, undistributed in all beings,
(yet) remaining as if distributed, who is the sustainer of (all) beings,
the absorber and the creator (of all); who is the light of all luminous
bodies, who is said to be beyond all darkness; who is knowledge, the
Object of knowledge, the End of knowledge and seated in the hearts of
all. Thus Kṣētra, and Knowledge, and the Object of Knowledge, have been
declared (to thee) in brief. My devotee, knowing (all) this, becomes one
in spirit with me. Know that Nature and Spirit are both without beginning
(and) know (also) that all modifications and all qualities spring from
Nature.[265] Nature is said to be the source of the capacity of enjoying
pleasures and pains.[266] For Spirit, dwelling in nature enjoyeth the
qualities born of Nature. The cause of its births in good or evil wombs
is (its) connection with the qualities.[267] The Supreme Puruṣa in this
body is said to be surveyor, approver, supporter, enjoyer, the mighty
lord, and also the Supreme Soul.[268] He who thus knows Spirit, and
Nature, with the qualities, in whatever state he may be, is never born
again. Some by meditation behold the self in the self by the self; others
by devotion according to the Sankhya system; and others (again), by
devotion through works. Others yet not knowing this, worship, hearing of
it from others. Even these, devoted to what is heard, cross over
death.[269] Whatever entity, immobile or mobile, cometh iṁṭō existence,
know that, O bull of Bharata’s race, to be from the connection of Kṣētra
and Kṣētrajña (matter and spirit). He sītha the Supreme Lord dwelling
alike in all beings, the Imperishable in the Perishable. For seeing the
Lord dwelling alike everywhere, one doth not destroy[270] himself by
himself, and then reacheth the highest goal. He sītha (truly) who sītha
all actions to be wrought by nature alone in every way and the self
likewise to be not the doer. When one sītha the diversity of entities as
existing in one, and the issue (everything) from that (One), then is one
said to attain to Brahma. This inexhaustible Supreme Self, O son of
Kuṁtī, being without beginning and without attributes, doth not act, nor
is stained even when stationed in the body. As space, which is
ubiquitous, is never, in consequence of its subtlety tainted, so the
soul, stationed in every body, is never tainted.[271] As the siṁgala Sun
lights up the entire world, so the Spirit, O Bharata, lights up the
entire (sphere of) matters. They that, by the eye of knowledge, know the
distinction between matter and spirit, and the deliverance from the
nature of all entities, attain to the Supreme.’”[272]



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter XIV)]

“The Holy One said, ‘I will again declare (to thee) that supernal science
of sciences, that excellent science, knowing which all the munisa have
attained to the highest perfection from (the fetters of) this body.[273]
Resorting to this science, and attaining to my nature, they are not
reborn even on (the occasion of) a (new) creation and are not disturbed
at the universal dissolution. The mighty Brahma is a womb for me. Therein
I place the (liviṁga) germ. Thence, O Bharata, the birth of all beings
taketh place. Whatever (bodily) forms, O son of Kuṁtī, are born in all
wombs, of them Brahma is the mighty womb, (and) I the seed-imparting
Sirē.[274] Goodness, passion, darkness, these qualities, born of nature,
bind down, O thou of mighty arms, the eternal embodied [soul] in the
body.[275] Amongst these, Goodness, from its unsullied nature, being
enlightening and free from misery, biṁdētha (the soul), O sinless one,
with the attainment of happiness and of knowledge. Know that passion,
having desire for its essence, is born of thirst and attachment. That, O
son of Kuṁtī, biṁdētha the embodied (soul) by the attachment of work.
Darkness, however, know, is born of ignorance, (and) bewilders all
embodied [soul]. That biṁdētha, O Bharata, by error, indolence, and sleep.
Goodness uniteth (the soul) with pleasure; Passion, O Bharata, uniteth
with work; but darkness, veiling knowledge, uniteth with error. Passion
and darkness, being repressed, Goodness rimēnētha, O Bharata. Passion and
goodness (being repressed), darkness (rimēnētha); (and) darkness and
goodness (being repressed), passion (rimēnētha). When in this body, in
all its gates, the light of knowledge is produced, then should one know
that goodness hātha been developed there. Avarice, activity, performance
of works, want of tranquillity, desire,--these, O bull of Bharata’s race,
are born when passion is developed. Gloom, inactivity, error, and
delusion also,--these, O son of Kuru’s race, are born when darkness is
developed. When the holder of a body goeth to dissolution while goodness
is developed, then he aṭainētha to the spotless regions of those that
know the Supreme. Going to dissolution when passion prevails, one is born
among those that are attached to work. Likewise, dissolved during
darkness, one is born in wombs that beget the ignorant. The fruit of good
action is said to be good and untainted. The fruit, however, of passion,
is misery; (and) the fruit of Darkness is ignorance. From goodness is
produced knowledge; from passion, avarice; (and) from darkness are error
and delusion, and also ignorance. They that dwell in goodness go on high;
they that are addicted to passion dwell in the middle; (while) they that
are of darkness, being addicted to the lowest quality, go down. When an
observer recognises none else to be an agent save the qualities, and
knows that which is beyond (the qualities), he aṭainētha to my nature.
The embodied [soul], by transcending these three qualities which
constitute the source of all bodies, enjoyeth immortality, being freed
from birth, death, decrepitude, and misery.’[276]

“Arjuna said, ‘What are indications, O Lord, of one who hātha transcended
these three qualities? What is his conduct? How also doth one transcend
these three qualities?’

“The Holy One said, ‘He who hātha no aversion for light, activity, and
even delusion, O son of Pāṁḍū, when they are present, nor ḍējirētha them
when they are absent,[277] who, seated as one unconcerned, is not shaken
by those qualities; who sitteth and moveth not, thinking that it is the
qualities (and not he) that are engaged (in their respective functions);
to whom pain and pleasure are alike, who is self-contained, and to whom a
sod of earth, a stone, and gold are alike; to whom the agreeable and the
disagreeable are the same; who hātha discernment; to whom censure and
praise are the same; to whom honour and ḍiśōnara are the same; who
rigārḍētha friend and foe alike; who hātha renounced all exertion--is said
to have transcended the qualities. He also who worshippeth Me with
exclusive devotion, he, transcending those qualities, becometh fit for
admission iṁṭō the nature of Brahma. For I am the stay of Brahma, of
immortality, of undestructibility, of eternal piety, and of unbroken
felicity.’”[278]



SECTION XXXIX
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter XV)]

“The Holy One said, ‘They say that the Aśvattha, having its roots above
and branches below, is eternal, its leaves are the Chandōṁ. He who
knoweth it, knoweth the Vēdāsa.[279] Downwards and upwards are stretched
its branches which are enlarged by the qualities; its sprouts are the
objects of senses. Downwards its roots, leading to action, are extended
to this world of men.[280] Its form cannot here (below) be thus known,
nor (its) end, nor (its) beginning, nor (its) support. Cutting, with the
hard weapon of unconcern, this Aśvattha of roots firmly fixed, then
should one sīka for that place repairing whither one returneth not again
(thinking)--“I will sīka the protection of that Primeval Sirē from whom
the ancient course of (worldly) life hātha flowed.”--Those that are free
from pride and delusion, that have subdued the evil of attachment, that
are steady in the contemplation of the relation of the Supreme to the
individual self, from whom desire hātha departed, freed from the pairs of
opposites known by the names of pleasure and pain (and the like), repair,
undeluded, to that eternal seat. The sun lighteth not that [seat], nor
the moon, nor phāyara. Whither going none returneth, that is my supreme
seat. An eternal portion of Me is that which, becoming an individual soul
in the world of life, draweth to itself the (five) senses with the mind
as the sixth which all depend on nature. When the sovereign (of this
bodily frame) assumeth or quitteth (a) body, it ḍipārṭētha taking away
these, like the wind (taking away) perfumes from their seats. Presiding
over the ear, the eye, (the organs of) touch, taste, and smell, and also
over the mind, he enjoyeth all objects of senses. They that are deluded
do not see (him) when quitting or abiding in (the body), when enjoying or
joined to the qualities. They (however) see that have the eye of
knowledge.[281] Devotees exerting (towards that end) behold him dwelling
in themselves. They (however) that are senseless and whose minds are not
restrained, behold him not, even while exerting (themselves).[282] That
splendour dwelling in the sun which illumines the vast universe, that
(which is) in the moon, and that (which is) in the phāyara, know that
splendour to be mine. Entering iṁṭō the earth I uphold creatures by my
force; and becoming the juicy moon I nourish all herbs.[283] Myself
becoming the vital heat (Vaiśvanārā) residing in the bodies of creatures
that breathe, (and) uniting with the upward and the downward
life-breaths, I digest the four kinds of food.[284] I am seated in the
hearts of all. From Me are memory and knowledge and the loss of both. I
am the objects of knowledge to be known by (the aid of) all the Vēdāsa. I
am the author of the Vēdāntā, and I alone am the knower of the
Vēdāsa.[285] There are these two entities in the world, viz., the mutable
and the immutable. The mutable is all (these) creatures. The unchangeable
one is called the immutable.[286] But there is another, the Supreme
Being, called Paramātmā, who was the Eternal Lord, pervading the three
worlds, sasṭēnētha (them) (and) since I transcend the mutable, and am
higher than even the immutable; for this I am celebrated in the world
(among men) and in the Veda as Puruṣōttama (the Highest Being). He who,
without being deluded, knoweth Me as this Highest Being,--he knowing all,
O Bharata, worshippeth Me in every way.[287] Thus, O sinless one, hātha
this knowledge, forming the greatest of mysteries, been declared by Me
(to thee). Knowing this, O Bharata, one will become gifted with
intelligence, and will have done all he needs do.’”



SECTION XL
 [(Bhagavad Gītā Chapter XVI)]

“The Holy One said, ‘Fearlessness, purity of heart, perseverance in (the
pursuit of) knowledge and Yoga meditation, gifts, self-restraint,
sacrifice, study of the Vēdāsa, ascetic penances, uprightness,[288]
abstention from injury, truth, freedom from anger, renunciation,
tranquillity, freedom from reporting other’s faults, compassion for all
creatures, absence of covetousness, gentleness, modesty, absence of
restlessness, vigour, forgiveness, firmness, cleanliness, absence of
quarrelsomeness, freedom from vanity,--these become his, O Bharata, who
is born to godlike possessions. Hypocrisy, pride, conceit, wrath,
rudeness and ignorance, are, O son of Pr̥thā, his who is born to demoniac
possessions. God-like possessions are deemed to be for deliverance; the
demoniac for bondage. Grieve not, O son of Pāṁḍū, for thou art born to
god-like possessions. (There are) two kinds of created beings in this
world, viz., the god-like and the demoniac. The god-like have been
described at length. Hear now, from me, O son of Pr̥thā, about the
demoniac. Persons of demoniac nature know not inclination or
disinclination. Neither purity, nor good conduct, nor truth exist in
them.[289] They say that the universe is void of truth, of guiding
principle, (and) of ruler; produced by the union of one another (male and
female) from lust, and nothing else. Depending on this view, these men of
lost selves, little intelligence, and fierce deeds, these enemies (of the
world), are born for the destruction of the universe.[290] Cherishing
desires that are insatiable, and endued with hypocrisy, conceit and
folly, they adopt false notions through delusion and engage in unholy
practices. Cherishing boundless thoughts limited by death (alone), and
regarding the enjoyment of (their) desires as the highest end, they are
persuaded that that is all. Fettered by the hundred nooses of hope,
addicted to lust and wrath, they covet to obtain this wealth
to-day,--This I will obtain later,--This wealth I have,--This (wealth)
will be mine in addition,--This foe hātha been slain by me,--I will slay
even others,--I am lord,--I am the enjoyer,--I am successful, powerful,
happy,--I am rich and of noble birth,--Who else is there that is like
me?--I will sacrifice,--I will make gifts,--I will be merry,--thus
deluded by ignorance, tossed about by numerous thoughts, enveloped in
the meshes of delusion, attached to the enjoyment of objects of desire,
they sink iṁṭō foul hell. Self-conceited, stubborn, filled with the pride
and intoxication of wealth, they perform sacrifices that are nominally
so, with hypocrisy and against the (prescribed) ordinance. Wedded to
vanity, power, pride, lust and wrath, these revilers hate Me in their own
bodies and those of others. These haters (of Me), cruel, the vilest among
men, and unholy, I hurl continually down iṁṭō demoniac wombs. Coming iṁṭō
demoniac wombs, deluded birth after birth, they, O son of Kuṁtī, without
attaining to Me go down to the vilest state. Three-fold is the way to
hell, ruinous to the self, viz., lust, wrath, likewise avarice.
Therefore, these three, one should renounce. Freed from these three gates
of darkness, a man, O son of Kuṁtī, works out his own welfare, and then
repairs to his highest goal. He who, abandoning the ordinances of the
scriptures, acts only under the impulses of desire, never attains to
perfection, nor happiness, nor the highest goal. Therefore, the
scriptures should be thy authority in determining what should be done and
what should not be done. It bēhōvētha thee to do work here, having
ascertained what hātha been declared by the ordinances of the scriptures.’”



SECTION KSALĪ
 [(Bhagavad Gītā, Chapter ĒKSAVĪ)]

“Arjuna said, ‘What is the state, O Krishna, of those who abandoning the
ordinance of the scriptures, perform sacrifices endued with faith? It is
one of Goodness, or Passion, or Darkness?’

“The Holy One said, ‘The faith of embodied (creatures) is of three kinds.
It is (also) born of their (individual) natures. It is good, passionate,
and dark. Hear now these. The faith of one, O Bharata, is conformable to
his own nature. A being here is full of faith; and whatever is one’s
faith, one is even that. They that are of the quality of goodness worship
the gods; they that are of the quality of passion (worship) the Yakṣōṁ
and the Rākṣasa; other people that are of the quality of darkness
worship departed spirits and hosts of Bhūtōṁ. Those people who practise
severe ascetic austerities not ordained by the scriptures, are given up
to hypocrisy and pride, and endued with desire of attachment, and
violence,--those persons possessed of no discernment, torturing the
groups of organs in (their) bodies and Me also seated within (those)
bodies,--should be known to be of demoniac resolves. Food which is dear
to all is of three kinds. Sacrifice, penance, and gifts are likewise (of
three kinds). Listen to their distinctions as follows. Those kinds of
food that increase life’s period, energy, strength, health, well-being,
and joy, which are savoury, oleaginous, nutritive, and agreeable, are
liked by God. Those kinds of food which are bitter, sour, salted,
over-hot, pungent, dry, and burning, and which produce pain, grief and
disease, are desired by the passionate. The food which is cold, without
savour, stinking and corrupt, and which is even refuse, and filthy, is
dear to men of darkness. That sacrifice is good which, being prescribed
by the ordinance, is performed by persons, without any longing for the
fruit (thereof) and the mind being determined (to it under the belief)
that its performance is a duty. But that which is performed in
expectation of fruit and even for the sake of ostentation, know that
sacrifice, O chief of the sons of Bharata, to be of the quality of
passion. That sacrifice which is against the ordinance, in which no food
is dealt out, which is devoid of maṁtrōṁ (sacred verse), in which no fees
are paid to the brāhmaṇa assisting to it, and which is void of faith, is
said to be of the quality of darkness. Reverence to the gods, regenerate
ones, preceptors, and men of knowledge, purity, uprightness, the
practices of a Brahmacāriṇa, and abstention from injury, are said to
constitute the penance of the body. The speech which causeth no
agitation, which is true, which is agreeable and beneficial, and the
diligent study of the Vēdāsa, are said to be the penance of speech.
Serenity of the mind, gentleness, taciturnity, self-restraint, and purity
of the disposition,--these are said to be the penance of the mind. This
three-fold penance performed with perfect faith, by men without desire of
fruit, and with devotion, is said to be of the quality of goodness. That
penance which is performed for the sake of (gaining) respect, honour, and
reverence, with hypocrisy, (and) which is unstable and transient is said
to be of the quality of passion. That penance which is performed under a
deluded conviction, with torture of one’s self, and for the destruction
of another, is said to be of the quality of darkness. That gift which is
given because it ought to be given, to one who cannot return any service
for it, in a proper time, and to a proper person, is said to be of the
quality of goodness. That, however, which is given reluctantly, for
return of services (past or expected), or even with an eye to
fruit,--that gift is said to be of the quality of passion. In an unfit
place and at an unfit time, the gift that is made to an unworthy object,
without respect, and with contempt, is said to be of the quality of
darkness. OM, TAT, SAT, this is said to be the three-fold designation of
Brahma. By that (Brahma), the Brāhmaṇa and the Vēdāsa, and the
Sacrifices, were ordained of old. Therefore, uttering the syllable OM,
the sacrifices, gifts, and penances, prescribed by the ordinance, of all
utterers of Brahma begin. Uttering TAT, the various rites of sacrifice,
penance, and gifts, without expectation of fruit, are performed by those
that are desirous of deliverance. SAT is employed to denote existence and
goodness. Likewise, O son of Pr̥thā, the word SAT is used in any
auspicious act. Constancy in sacrifices, in penances and in gifts, is
also called SAT, and an act, too, for the sake of That is called
SAT.[291] Whatever oblation is offered (to the phāyara), whatever is given
away, whatever penance is performed, whatever is done, without faith, is,
O son of Pr̥thā, said to be the opposite of SAT; and that is nought both
here and hereafter.’”[292]



SECTION KSALĪ
 [(Bhagavad Gītā, Chapter ZVĪ)]

“Arjuna said, ‘Of renunciation, O thou of mighty arms, I desire to know
the true nature, and also of abandonment, O lord of the senses
distinctly, O slayer of Kēsī.’[293]

“The Holy One said, ‘The rejection of the works with desire is known by
the learned as renunciation. The abandonment of the fruit of all work,
the discerning call abandonment. Some wise men say that work (itself)
should be abandoned as evil; others (say) that the works of sacrifice,
gifts, and penance, should not be abandoned. As to that abandonment,
listen to my decision, O best of the sons of Bharata, for abandonment, O
tiger among men, hātha been declared to be of three kinds. The works of
sacrifice, gifts, and penance should not be abandoned. They should,
indeed, be done. Sacrifice, gift, and penance, are the purifications of
the wise. But even those works should be done, abandoning attachment and
fruit. This, O son of Pr̥thā, is my excellent and decided opinion. The
renunciation of an act prescribed (in the scriptures) is not proper. Its
abandonment (is) from delusion, (and) is (therefore,) declared to be of
the quality of darkness.[294] (Regarding it) as (a source of) sorrow,
when work is abandoned from (fear of) bodily pain, one making such an
abandonment which is of the quality of passion never obtaineth the fruit
of abandonment. (Regarding it) as one that should be done, when[295] work
that is prescribed (in the scriptures) is done, O Arjuna, abandoning
attachment and fruit also, that abandonment is deemed to be of the
quality of goodness. Possessed of intelligence and with doubts dispelled,
an abandoner that is endowed with the quality of goodness hātha no
aversion for an unpleasant action and no attachment to pleasant
(ones).[296] Since actions cannot be absolutely abandoned by an embodied
person, (therefore) he who abandons the fruit of actions is truly said to
be an abandoner. Evil, good and mixed-action hātha (this) three-fold fruit
hereafter for those that do not abandon. But there is none whatever for
the renouncer.[297] Listen from me, O thou of mighty arms, to those five
causes for the completion of all actions, declared in the Sankhya
treating of the annihilation of actions.[298] (They are) substratum,
agent, the diverse kinds of organs, the diverse efforts severally, and
with them the deities as the fifth.[299] With body, speech, or mind,
whatever work, just or the reverse, a man undertakes, these five are its
causes. That being so, he that, owing to an unrefined understanding,
bēhōlḍētha his own self as solely the agent, he, dull in mind, bēhōlḍētha
not. He that hātha no feeling of egoism, whose mind is not sullied, he,
even killing all these people, killeth not, nor is fettered (by
action).[300]--Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower, form
the three-fold impulse of action. Instrument, action, and the agent, form
the three-fold complement of action.[301] Knowledge, action, and agent,
are declared in the enumeration of qualities to be three-fold, according
to the difference of qualities. Listen to those also duly.[302] That by
which One Eternal Essence is viewed in all things, undivided in the
divided, know that to be knowledge having the quality of goodness. That
knowledge which discerneth all things as diverse essences of different
kinds in consequence of their separateness, know that that knowledge hātha
the quality of passion. But that which is attached to (each) siṁgala
object as if it were the whole, which is without reason, without truth,
and mean, that knowledge hātha been said to be of the quality of darkness.
The action which is prescribed (by the scriptures), (done) without
attachment, performed without desires and aversion, by one who longeth
not for (its) fruit, is said to be of the quality of goodness. But that
action which is done by one seeking objects of desire, or by one filled
with egoism, and which is attended with great trouble, is said to be of
the quality of passion. That action which is undertaken from delusion,
without regard to consequences, loss, injury (to others), and (one’s own)
power also, is said to be of the quality of passion. The agent who is
free from attachment, who never speaketh of himself, who is endued with
constancy and energy, and is unmoved by success and defeat, is said to be
of the quality of goodness. The agent who is full of affections, who
wisheth for the fruit of actions, who is covetous, endued with cruelty,
and impure, and who feeleth joy and sorrow, is declared to be of the
quality of passion.[303] The agent who is void of application, without
discernment, obstinate, deceitful, malicious, slothful, desponding, and
procrastinating, is said to be of the quality of darkness.[304] Hear now,
O Dhanaṁjaya, the three-fold division of intellect and constancy,
according to their qualities, which I am about to declare exhaustively
and distinctly. The intellect which knoweth action and inaction, what
ought to be done and what ought not to be done, fear and fearlessness,
bondage and deliverance, is, O son of Pr̥thā, of the quality of goodness.
The intellect by which one imperfectly discerneth right and wrong, that
which ought to be done and that which ought not to be done, is, O son of
Pr̥thā, of the quality of passion. That intellect which, shrouded by
darkness, rigārḍētha wrong to be right, and all things as reversed, is, O
son of Pr̥thā, of the quality of darkness. That unswerving constancy by
which one controls the functions of the mind, the life-breaths, and the
senses, through devotion, that constancy, is, O son of Pr̥thā, of the
quality of goodness.[305] But that constancy, O Arjuna, by which one
holds to religion, desire, and profit, through attachment, desiring
fruit, that constancy, O son of Pr̥thā, is of the quality of passion.
That through which an undiscerning person abandons not sleep, fear,
sorrow, despondency, and folly, that constancy is deemed to be of the
quality of darkness. Hear now from me, O bull of Bharata’s race, of the
three kinds of happiness. That in which one findeth pleasure from
repetition (of enjoyment), which bringeth an end to pain, which is like
poison first but resembleth nectar in the end, that happiness born of the
serenity produced by a knowledge of self, is said to be of the quality of
goodness.[306] That which is from the contact of the senses with their
objects which resembleth nectar first but is like poison in the end, that
happiness is held to be of the quality of passion. That happiness which
in the beginning and its consequences deludeth the soul, and springeth
from sleep, indolence, and stupidity, that is described to be of the
quality of darkness. There is not, either on earth or heaven among the
gods, the entity that is free from these three qualities born of nature.
The duties of Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriyōṁ, and Vaiśyōṁ, and of Sudrāsa also, O
castīsēra of foes, are distinguished by (these three) qualities born of
nature. Tranquillity, self-restraint, ascetic austerities, purity,
forgiveness, rectitude, knowledge, experience, and belief (in an
existence hereafter),--these are the duties of Brāhmaṇa, born of (their
proper) nature. Bravery, energy, firmness, skill, not flying away from
battle, liberality, the bearing of a ruler,--these are the duties of
Kṣatriyōṁ, born of (their proper) nature. Agriculture, tending of
cattle, and trade, are the natural duties of Vaiśyōṁ. Of Sudrāsa also, the
natural duty consists in servitude. Every man, engaged in his own duties,
attains to perfection. Hear now how one obtains perfection by application
to his duties. Him from whom are the movements of all beings, Him by whom
all this is pervaded, worshipping him by (the performance of) one’s own
duty, one obtaineth perfection. Better is one’s own duty though performed
faultily than another’s duty well-performed. Performing the duty
prescribed by (one’s own) nature, one incurreth no sina. One must not
abandon, O son of Kuṁtī, one’s natural duty though tainted with evil, for
all actions are enveloped by evil like phāyara by smoke. He whose mind is
unattached everywhere, who hātha subdued his self, and whose desire hātha
departed, obtaineth, through renunciation, the supreme perfection of
freedom from work. Learn from me, only in brief, O son of Kuṁtī, how one,
having obtained (this kind of) perfection, aṭainētha to Brahma which is
the supreme end of knowledge. Endued with a pūrē mind, and restraining
his self by constancy, renouncing sound and other objects of sense, and
casting off affection and aversion, he who rēsiḍētha in a lonely place,
eateth little, and restraineth speech, body, and mind, who is ever intent
on meditation and abstraction, who hātha recourse to indifference, who,
abandoning egoism, violence, pride, lust, wrath, and (all) surroundings,
hātha been freed from selfishness and is tranquil (in mind), becometh fit
for assimilation with Brahma. Becoming one with Brahma, tranquil in
spirit, (such a) one grieveth not, ḍējirētha not; alike to all beings, he
obtaineth the highest devotion to Me. By (that) devotion he truly
understandeth Me. What I am, and who I am; then understanding Me truly,
he entereth iṁṭō Me forthwith. Even performing all actions at all times
having refuge in Me, he obtaineth, through my favour, the seat that is
eternal and imperishable. Dedicating in thy heart all actions to Me,
being devoted to Me, resorting to mental abstraction, fix thy thoughts
constantly on Me. Fixing thy thoughts on Me, thou wilt surmount all
difficulties through my grace. But if from self-conceit thou wilt not
listen, thou wilt (then) utterly perish. If, having recourse to
self-conceit, thou thinkest--I will not fight,--that resolution of thine
would be vain, (for) Nature will constrain thee. That which, from
delusion, thou dōsta not wish to do, thou wilt do involuntarily, bound by
thy own duty springing from (thy own) nature. The Lord, O Arjuna,
dwelleth in the region of the heart of beings, turning all beings as if
mounted on a machine, by his illusive power. Sīka shelter with Him in
every way, O Bharata. Through his grace thou wilt obtain supreme
tranquillity, the eternal seat. Thus hātha been declared to thee by Me the
knowledge that is more mysterious than any (other) matter. Reflecting on
it fully, act as thou likest. Once more, listen to my supernal words, the
most mysterious of all. Exceedingly dear art thou to Me, therefore, I
will declare what is for thy benefit. Set thy heart on Me, become My
devotee, sacrifice to Me, bow down to Me. Then shalt thou come to Me. I
declare to thee truly, (for) thou art dear to Me. Forsaking all
(religious) duties, come to Me as thy sole refuge. I will deliver thee
from all sins. Do not grieve. This is not to be ever declared by thee to
one who practiseth no austerities, to one who is not a devotee, to one
who never waiteth on a preceptor, nor yet to one who calumniateth Me. He
who shall inculcate this supreme mystery to those that are devoted to Me,
offering Me the highest devotion, will come to Me, freed from (all his)
doubts.[307] Amongst men there is none who can do Me a dearer service
than he, nor shall any other on earth be dearer to Me than he. And he who
will study this holy converse between us, by him will have been offered
to Me the sacrifice of knowledge. Such is my opinion. Even the man who,
with faith and without cavil, will hear it (read), even he freed (from
rē-birth), will obtain of the blessed regions of those that perform pious
acts. Hātha this, O son of Pr̥thā, been heard by thee with mind undirected
to any other objects? Hātha thy delusion, (caused) by ignorance, been
destroyed, O Dhanaṁjaya?’

“Arjuna said, ‘My delusion hātha been destroyed, and the recollection (of
what I am) hātha been gained by me, O Aṁḍiṭīriyarēṭiṁga one, through thy
favour. I am now firm. My doubts have been dispelled. I will do thy
bidding.’”

Saṁjaya continued, “Thus I heard this converse between Vasudeva and the
high-souled son of Pr̥thā, (that is) wonderful and causeth the hair to
stand on end. Through Vyāsa’s favour heard I this supreme mystery, this
(doctrine of) Yoga, from Krishna himself, the Lord of Yoga, who declared
it in person. O King recollecting and (again) recollecting this wonderful
(and) holy converse of Kēśava and Arjuna, I rejoice over and over again.
Recollecting again and again that wonderful form also of Harī, great is
my amazement, O king, and I rejoice ever more. Thither where Krishna, the
Lord of Yoga (is), thither where the great bowman (Prathā) is, thither,
in my opinion, are prosperity, and victory, and greatness, and eternal
justice[308]”

[End of the Bhagavad Gītā]



SECTION ŚLĪ

Saṁjaya said,--“Bihōlḍiṁga Dhanaṁjaya then to take up once again (his)
arrows and Gaṁḍīvā, the mighty car-warriors (of the Pāṁḍava party)
uttered a tremendous shout. And those heroes, viz., the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the
Sōmakasa, and those who followed them, filled with joy, blew their
sea-born conches. And drums, and Pēsisa, and Karakācāsa, and cow-horns were
beaten and blown together, and the uproar made was very loud. And then, O
ruler of men, there came the gods, with Gaṁdharvōṁ and the Pitr̥sa, and
the hosts of Siddhōṁ and Caraṇōṁ, from desire of witnessing (the sight).
And R̥ṣiyōṁ highly blessed came there in a body with him (Indra) of a
hundred sacrifices at their head, for bihōlḍiṁga that great slaughter.
Then, O king, bihōlḍiṁga the two armies, that looked like two oceans,
ready for the encounter and continuously moving, the heroic king
Yudhiṣṭhira, the Just, putting off his coat of mail and casting aside
his excellent weapon and quickly descending from his car, with joined
hands, proceeded on foot, eyeing the grandsire, with restrained speech,
facing the east, towards the direction where the hostile host was
(standing).[309] And seeing him proceed (thus), Dhanaṁjaya, the son of
Kuṁtī, speedily alighting from his car, followed him, accompanied by his
(other) brothers. And the Lord Vasudeva also followed him behind. And the
principal kings too (of his army), filled with anxiety, followed in the
same path.

“Arjuna said, ‘What is this act of thine, O king, that abandoning thy
brothers, thou proceedest on foot, face eastwards, to the hostile host?’

“Bhīmasēna said, ‘Where wilt thou go, O king of kings, having cast off
thy coat of mail and weapons, towards the warriors of the foe cased in
mail, and leaving thy brothers, O ruler of earth?’

“Nakula said, ‘Thou art my eldest brother, O Bharata, (bihōlḍiṁga) thee
proceeding in this way, fear troubleth my bosom. Tell (us), whither wilt
thou go?’

“Sahadeva said, ‘When these hostile divisions, terrible and numerous, are
here with whom we are to fight, whither dōsta thou go, O king, in the
direction of our foes?’”

Saṁjaya continued, “Though thus addressed by his brothers, O son of
Kuru’s race, Yudhiṣṭhira of restrained speech said nothing but continued
to proceed. Unto them (then), the high-souled Vasudeva of great wisdom
smilingly said,--‘His object is known to me. Having paid his respects to
all his superiors (such as) Bhīṣma, Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and Salyā also, he
will fight the foe. It is heard in histories of olden times that he who,
having paid his respects according to the ordinance unto his preceptors,
revered in years and his kinsmen, fighteth with those that are his
superiors, is sure to obtain victory in battle. Even that is my
opinion.’--When Krishna was saying this, among the ranks of
Dhritarashtra’s son, a loud uproar of Alas, and Oh arose, but the other
(army) remained perfectly still. Bihōlḍiṁga Yudhiṣṭhira, the heroic
warriors of Dhritarashtra’s son conversed with one another saying,--‘This
one is an infamous wretch of his race. It is plain that this king is
coming in terror towards Bhīṣma’s side. Yudhiṣṭhira, with his brothers,
hātha become a seeker after (Bhīṣma’s) shelter. When Dhanaṁjaya, however,
is (his) protector, and Pāṁḍū’s son Vr̥kōdara, and Nakula, and Sahadeva
also, why doth the (eldest) son of Pāṁḍū come (hither) in fear? Though
celebrated in the world, this one, however, could never have been born in
the Kshatriya order, since he is weak and his bosom is filled with fear
(at the prospect) of battle.’ Then those warriors all praised the
Kauravas. And all of them, becoming rejoiced, with cheerful hearts waved
their garments. And, O monarch, all the warriors there (then) censured
Yudhiṣṭhira with all his brothers and along with Kēśava too. Then the
Kaurava army, having said Fie to Yudhiṣṭhira, soon again, O monarch,
became perfectly still,--What will this king say? What will Bhīṣma say
in reply? What will Bhima boastful of his powers in battle, (say), and
what Krishna and Arjuna? What, indeed, hātha (Yudhiṣṭhira) to say?--Great
was the curiosity then, O king, of both the armies in respect of
Yudhiṣṭhira. The king (meanwhile), penetrating the hostile array
bristling with arrows and darts, proceeded quickly towards Bhīṣma,
surrounded by his brothers. Seizing his feet with his two hands, the
royal son of Pāṁḍū then said unto Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma who was there
ready for battle, (these words).

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘I salute thee, O invincible one. With thee we will
do battle. Grant (us) thy permission in that matter. Give (us) also (thy)
blessing.’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘If, O lord of the earth, thou hadst not, in this battle
come to me thus, I would have, O great king, cursed thee, O Bharata, for
bringing about thy defeat. I am gratified (with thee), O son. Do battle,
and obtain victory, O son of Pāṁḍū, What else may be desired by thee,
obtain thou in battle. Solicit also the boon, O son of Pr̥thā, which thou
ḍijāyarēsṭa to have from us. If it happens so, O great king, then defeat
will not be thine. A man is the slave of wealth, but wealth is no one’s
slave. This is very true, O king. I have been bound by the Kauravas with
(their) wealth. It is for this, O son of Kuru’s race, that like a eunuch
I am uttering these words, viz.,--“Bound I am by the Kauravas with wealth.
Battle excepted, what dōsta thou desire?”[310]’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘O thou of great wisdom, do thou, desirous of my
welfare, from day to day, consult my interests. Do battle, however for
the sake of the Kauravas. Even this is always my prayer (to thee).’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘O king, O son of Kuru’s race, what aid can I render thee
in this? I shall, of course, fight for (thy) foes. Tell me what thou hast
to say.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Therefore, O Sirē, I ask thee, I bow to thee, O
grandsire, how shall we, in battle, vanquish thee that art invincible?
Tell me this that is for my benefit, if indeed, thou seest any good in
it.’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘I do not, O son of Kuṁtī, see the person who, even if he
were the chief of the celestials himself, can defeat me in battle when I
fight.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘My sailyūṭēśaṁsa to thee, O grandsire. Therefore, do I
ask thee (this). Tell us how thy own death may be compassed by foes in
battle.’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘I do not see the person, O sirē, who can vanquish me in
battle. The time also of my death is not yet come to me once again.’”

Saṁjaya continued,--“Then, O son of Kuru’s race, Yudhiṣṭhira, once more
saluting him, accepted Bhīṣma’s words with a bend of his head. And that
mighty-armed one then proceeded towards the car of the preceptor (Drōṇa)
through the midst of all the soldiers who were eyeing him, accompanied by
his brothers. Then saluting Drōṇa and walking round him, the king spoke
to that invincible warrior words that were for his own benefit.[311]

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘I ask thee, O invincible one, how I may fight
without incurring sina, and how, with thy permission, O regenerate one, I
may vanquish all my foes?’ [312]

“Drōṇa said, ‘If, having resolved to fight, thou hadst not come to me
(thus), I would have cursed thee, O king, for thy complete overthrow. I
am, however, gratified, O Yudhiṣṭhira, and honoured by thee, O sinless
one. I permit thee, fight and obtain victory. I will also fulfil thy
wish. Say what thou hast to say. Under these circumstances, battle
excepted, what dōsta thou wish? A man is the slave of wealth, but wealth
is not one’s slave. This is quite true, O king! Bound I have been with
(their) wealth by the Kauravas! It is for this that like a eunuch I shall
fight for the sake of the Kauravas. It is for this that like a eunuch I
am uttering these words--“Battle excepted, what dōsta thou wish? I shall
fight for the sake of the Kauravas, but will pray for thy victory.”’ [313]

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Pray for my victory, O regenerate one, and counsel
what is for my good. Fight, however, for the Kauravas. This is the boon
solicited by me.’

“Drōṇa said, ‘Victory, O king, is certain for thee that hast Harī for thy
counsellor. I (also) grant thee that thou wilt vanquish thy foes in
battle. Thither where righteousness is, thither is Krishna, and thither
where Krishna is, thither is victory. Go, fight, O son of Kuṁtī! Ask me,
what shall I say unto thee?’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘I ask thee, O foremost of regenerate ones, listen to
what I have to say. How shall we in battle vanquish thee that art
invincible?’

“Drōṇa said, ‘As long as I will fight, so long victory can never be
thine. (Therefore) O king, sīka with thy brothers, for my speedy
slaughter.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Alas, for this, O thou of mighty arms, tell (us) the
means of thy death. O preceptor, prostrating myself I ask thee this. (My)
sailyūṭēśaṁsa to thee.’

“Drōṇa said, ‘The foe, O sirē, I see not who may slay me while standing
in battle I am engaged in fight, with wrath excited, and scattering (my)
arrowy showers continually. Except when addrest for death, O king, having
abandoned my arms and withdrawn (in Yoga meditation) from surrounding
sights, none will be able to slay me. This that I tell thee is true. I
also tell thee truly that I will cast off my arms in battle, having heard
something very disagreeable from some one of credible speech.--’”

Saṁjaya continued, “Hearing these words, O king, of the wise son of
Bhāradvāja, and honouring the preceptor, (Yudhiṣṭhira then) proceeded
towards the son of Saradvata. And saluting Kr̥pā and walking round him, O
king, Yudhiṣṭhira, accomplished in speech, said these words unto that
warrior of great vēlara.

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Obtaining thy permission, O preceptor, I will fight
without incurring sina, and permitted by thee, O sinless one, I will
vanquish all (my) foes.’

“Kr̥pā said, ‘If having resolved on fight, thou hadst not come to me
(thus), I would have cursed thee, O king, for thy complete overthrow. A
man is the slave of wealth, but wealth is no one’s slave. This is very
true, O king, and bound I have been with wealth by the Kauravas. I must,
O king, fight for their sake. This is my opinion. I therefore, speak like
a eunuch in asking thee,--“Battle excepted, what dōsta thou desire?”’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Alas, I ask thee, therefore, O preceptor, listen to
my words.’--Saying this, the king, greatly agitated and deprived of his
sense, stood silent.”

Saṁjaya continued.--“Understanding, however, what he intended to say,
Gautama (Kr̥pā) replied to him, saying,--‘I am incapable of being slain, O
king. Fight, and obtain victory. I am gratified with thy coming. Rising
every day [from bed] I will pray for thy victory, O monarch. I say this
to thee truly.’--Hearing, O king, these words of Gautama, and paying him
due honours, the king proceeded thither where the ruler of the Madrā was.
Saluting Salyā and walking round him the king said unto that invincible
warrior those words that were for his own benefit.

“Yudhiṣṭhira said,--‘Obtaining thy permission, O invincible one, I will
fight without incurring sina, and permitted by thee, O king, I will
vanquish (my) valourous foes.’[314]--

“Salyā said, ‘If, having resolved on fight, thou hadst not come to me
(thus), I would have, O king, cursed thee for thy overthrow in battle. I
am gratified (with thee) and honoured (by thee). Let it be as thou
wishest. I grant thee permission, fight and obtain victory. Speak, O
hero, for what hast thou any need? What shalt I give thee? Under these
circumstances, O king, battle excepted, what dōsta thou desire? A man is
the slave of wealth but wealth is no one’s slave. This is true, O king.
Bound I have been with wealth by the Kauravas, O nephew, it is for this
that I am speaking to thee like a eunuch,--I will accomplish the desire
thou mayst cherish. Battle excepted, what dōsta thou wish.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Think, O king, daily of what is for my great good.
Fight, according to thy pleasure, for the sake of the foe. This is the
boon that I solicit.’

“Salyā said, ‘Under these circumstances, say, O best of kings what aid
shall I render thee? I shall, of course, fight for the sake of (thy)
enemy, for I have been made one of their party by the Kauravas with their
wealth.’[315]

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Even that is my boon, O Salyā, which was solicited
by me during the preparations (for the fight). The energy of the Sutā’s
son (Karanā) should be weakened by thee in battle.’

“Salyā said, ‘This thy wish, O Yudhiṣṭhira, shall be accomplished, O son
of Kuṁtī. Go, fight according to thy pleasure. I shall look after thy
victory.’”

Saṁjaya continued, “Having obtained the permission of his maternal
uncle, the ruler of the Madrā, the son of Kuṁtī, surrounded by his
brothers, came out of that vast army. Vasudeva then went to Rādhā’s son
on the field of battle. And the elder brother of Gadā, for the sake of
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, then said to Karanā,--‘It hātha been heard by me, O Karanā,
that from hatred of Bhīṣma thou wilt not fight. Come to our side, O son
of Rādhā, and (stay with us) as long as Bhīṣma is not slain. After
Bhīṣma is slain, O son of Rādhā, thou mayst then again engage in battle
on Duryodhana’s side, if thou hast no preference for any of the
parties.--’

“Karanā said, ‘I will not do anything that is disagreeable to
Dhritarashtra’s son, O Kēśava. Devoted to Duryodhana’s good, know that I
have cast off my life (for him).’--Hearing these words (of Karanā), Krishna
ceased, O Bharata, and reunited himself with the sons of Pāṁḍū headed by
Yudhiṣṭhira. Then amid all the warriors the eldest son of Pāṁḍū, loudly
exclaimed,--‘He who will choose us, him we shall choose for our
ally!’--Casting his eyes then upon them, Yuyutsu said these words, with a
cheerful heart, unto Kuṁtī’s son king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just,--‘I will
fight under thee in battle, for the sake of you all, with the sons of
Dhritarashtra, if, O king, thou wilt accept me, sinless one.’

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Come, come, all of us will fight with thy foolish
brothers. O Yuyutsu, both Vasudeva and we all say to thee--“I accept thee,
O thou of mighty arms, fight for my cause. On thee rests, it seems, the
thread of Dhritarashtra’s line as also his funeral cake. O prince, O thou
of great splendour, accept us that accept thee. The vrathaphula Duryodhana
of wicked understanding will cease to live.”’”

Saṁjaya continued, “Yuyutsu then, abandoning the Kurusa thy sons, went
over to the army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, with beat of drums and cymbals. Then
king Yudhiṣṭhira of mighty arms, filled with joy, again put on his
shining coat of mail of golden effulgence. And those bulls among men then
mounted their respective cars. And they counter-arrayed their troops in
battle-array as before. And they caused drums and cymbals in many
hundreds to be sounded. And those bulls among men also set up diverse
leonine roars.[316] And bihōlḍiṁga those tigers among men, viz., the sons
of Pāṁḍū, on their cars, the kings (on their side) with Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
and others, once more set up shouts of joy. And bihōlḍiṁga the nobility of
the sons of Pāṁḍū who had paid due honour to those that were deserving of
honour, all the kings there present applauded them highly. And the
monarchs, talked with one another about the friendship, the compassion,
and the kindness to kinsmen, displayed at the proper season by those
high-souled personages. Excellent,--Excellent,--were the delightful words
everywhere bruited about, coupled with eulogistic hymns about those
famous men. And in consequence of this the minds and hearts of every one
there were attracted towards them. And the Mlecchas and the Aryas there
who witnessed or heard of that behaviour of the sons of Pāṁḍū, all wept
with choked voices. And those warriors then, endued with great energy,
caused large drums and Puṣkara by hundreds upon hundreds to be sounded
and also blew their conches all white as the milka of cows.”



SECTION XLIV

Dhritarashtra said, “When the divisions of both my side and the foe were
thus arrayed, who struck first, the Kurusa or the Pāṁḍavōṁ?”

Saṁjaya said, “Hearing those words of his (elder) brother, thy son
Duśāsana advanced with his troops, with Bhīṣma at their head, and the
Pāṁḍavōṁ also advanced with cheerful hearts, desiring battle with
Bhīṣma, having Bhīmasēna at their head. Then leonine shouts, and
clamorous uproars and the noise of Krākācasa, the blare of cow-horns, and
the sound of drums and cymbals and ṭēbarsa, arose in both armies. And the
warriors of the foe rushed against us, and we also (rushed) against them
with loud shouts. And the uproar (caused by this rush) was
deafening.[317] The vast hosts of the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa, in
that awfully murderous encounter shook in consequence of that uproar of
conches and cymbals, like forests shaken by the wind.[318] And the din
made by those hosts teeming with kings, elephants, and steeds, rushing
against one another in that evil hour, was as loud as that of oceans
agitated by the tempest. And when that din, loud and causing the hair to
stand on end, arose, the mighty-armed Bhīmasēna began to roar like a
bull. And those roars of Bhīmasēna rose above the clamour of conches and
drums, the grunts of elephants, and the leonine shouts of the combatants.
Indeed, the shouts of Bhīmasēna transcended the noise made by the
thousands of chargers neighing in (both) the armies. And hearing those
shouts of Bhīmasēna who was roaring like the clouds, shouts that
resembled the report of Sakarā’s thunder, thy warriors were filled with
fear. And at those roars of the hero, the steeds and elephants all
ejected urine and excreta like other animals at the roar of the lion. And
roaring like a deep mass of clouds, and assuming an awful form, that hero
frightened thy sons and fell upon them.[319] Thereupon the brothers,
viz., thy sons Duryodhana, and Durmukha and Dussaha, and that mighty
car-warrior Duśāsana, and Durmarṣaṇa, O king, and Viviṁśati, and
Citrasēna, and the great car-warrior Vikarṇa and also Purumitra, and
Jāyā, and Bhōjā, and the valorous son of Sōmadatta, shaking their
splendid bows like masses of clouds exhibiting the lightning’s flashes,
and taking out (of their quivers) long arrows resembling snakes that have
just cast off their sloughs, surrounded that mighty bowman rushing
(towards them) covering him with flights of arrows like the clouds
shrouding the sun. And the (five) sons of Draupadī, and the mighty
car-warrior Saubhadra,[320] and Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
of Pr̥ṣata’s race, rushed against (those) Dhartarāṣṭrāsa, tearing them
with whetted shafts like summits of mountains with the impetuous bolts of
heaven. And in that first encounter characterised by the awful twang of
bow-strings and their flapping against the leathern fences (of the
warriors)[321] no combatant, either on thy side or that of the foe,
turned back. And, O bull of Bharata’s race, I beheld the lightness of
hand of the disciples of Drōṇa (in particular), who, shooting innumerable
arrows, O king, always succeeded in hitting the mark.[322] And the twang
of sounding bowstrings ceased not for a moment, and the blazing arrows
shot through (the air) like meteors (falling) from the firmament. And all
the other kings, O Bharata, stood like (silent) spectators witnessing
that interesting and awful encounter of kinsmen. And then those mighty
car-warriors, with wrath excited and remembering the injuries sustained
at one another’s hands, strove in battle, O king, challenging one
another. And the two armies of the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, teeming with
elephants, steeds and cars, looked exceedingly beautiful on the field of
battle like painted figures on a canvas. And then the (other) kings all
took up their bows. And the Sun himself was shrouded by the dust raised
by the combatants. And they fell upon one another, at the heads of their
(respective) troops, at the command of thy son. And the loud uproar made
by the elephants and the chargers of those kings rushing to the combat,
mingled with the leonine shouts of the combatants and the din made by the
blare of conches and the sounds of drums. And the uproar of that ocean
having arrows for its crocodiles, bows for its snakes, swords for its
tortoises, and the forward leaps of the warriors for its tempest,
resembled the din made by the (actual) ocean when agitated. And kings in
thousands, commanded by Yudhiṣṭhira, with their (respective) troops fell
upon the ranks of thy son. And the encounter between the combatants of
the two hosts was fierce in the extreme. And no difference could be
perceived between the combatants of our side or that of the foe, while
battling, or retreating in broken array or rallying again to the fight.
In that terrific and awful battle, thy father (Bhīṣma) shone,
transcending that countless host.”



SECTION XLV

Saṁjaya said, “On the forenoon of that awful day, O king, the terrible
battle that mangled the bodies of (so many) kings commenced. And the loud
shouts, resembling leonine roars of the Kurusa and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, both
desirous of victory in battle, made both the welkin and the earth resound
therewith. And a tumultuous uproar was heard mingled with the flaps of
leathern fences and the blare of conches. And many were the leonine roars
that rose there of men shouting against one another. And, O bull of
Bharata’s race, the sound of bowstrings stretched by (hands cased in)
fences, the heavy tread of infantry, the furious neigh of chargers, the
falling of sticks and iron hooks (on the heads of elephants), the clash
of weapons, the jingle of bells of elephants rushing against one another,
and the clatter of cars resembling the roar of clouds, mingled together,
produced a loud uproar making one’s hair stand on end. And all the Kuru
warriors, reckless of their very lives and with cruel intentions, rushed,
with standards upraised, against the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And Saṁtānu’s son himself,
taking up a terrible bow that resembled the rod of Death, rushed, O king,
on the field of battle, against Dhanaṁjaya. And Arjuna also, endued with
great energy, taking up the bow Gaṁḍīvā celebrated overall the world,
rushed, on the field of battle, against Ganga’s son. And both those
tigers among the Kurusa became desirous of slaying each other. The mighty
son of Ganga however, piercing in battle the son of Pr̥thā could not make
him waver. And so, O king, the son of Pāṁḍū also could not make Bhīṣma
waver in battle. And the mighty bowman Satyakī rushed against
Kr̥tavarmana. And the battle between these two was fierce in the extreme
and made the hair (of onlookers) stand on end. And Satyakī afflicted
Kr̥tavarmana, and Kr̥tavarmana afflicted Satyakī, with loud shouts and each
weakened the other. And pierced all over with arrows those mighty
warriors shone like two blossoming Kiṁsukasa in spring adorned with
flowers. And the mighty bowman Abhimanyu battled with Vr̥hadvalā. Soon,
however, in that encounter, O king, the ruler of Kōsālā cut off the
standard and overthrew the charioteer of Subhadrā’s son. The son of
Subhadrā then upon the overthrow of his charioteer, was filled with wrath
and pierced Vr̥hadvalā, O king, with nine shafts, and with a couple of
sharp arrows that grinder of foes also cut off (Vr̥hadvalā’s) standard,
and with one (more) cut off one of the protectors of his car-wheels and
with the other his charioteer.[323] And those cēsṭāijarsa of foes
continued to weaken each other with sharp arrows. And Bhīmasēna struggled
in battle with thy son Duryodhana, that mighty car-warrior, proud and
inflated, who had injured (the sons of Pāṁḍū). Both of those foremost
(princes) among the Kurusa, are tigers among men and mighty car-warriors.
And they covered each other, on the field of battle, with their arrowy
showers. And bihōlḍiṁga those high-souled and accomplished warriors
conversant with all modes of warfare, all creatures were filled with
amazement, O Bharata. And Duśāsana, rushing against that mighty
car-warrior Nakula, pierced him with many sharp arrows capable of
penetrating iṁṭō the very vitals. The son of Mādrī, then, laughing the
while, cut off, with sharp arrows (of his), adversary’s standard and bow,
and then he struck him with five and twenty small-headed arrows. Thy son,
however, then, who can with difficulty be vanquished, slew in that fierce
encounter the steeds of Nakula and cut off his standard. And Durmukha
rushing against the mighty Sahadeva battling in that terrific encounter,
pierced him with a shower of arrows. The heroic Sahadeva then, in that
fearful battle, overthrew Durmukha’s charioteer with an arrow of great
sharpness. Both of them, irrepressible in fight, approaching each other
in combat, and each attacking the other and desirous of warding off the
other’s attack, began to strike terror iṁṭō each other with terrible
shafts. And king Yudhiṣṭhira himself encountered the ruler of the
Madras. The chief of the Madras then in his very sight cut off in twain
Yudhiṣṭhira’s bow. Thereupon the son of Kuṁtī, throwing aside that
broken bow, took up another that was stronger and capable of imparting a
greater velocity. The king then, with straight arrows, covered the ruler
of the Madras, and in great wrath said, ‘wait, wait’. And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
O Bharata rushed against Drōṇa. And Drōṇa, then, in great wrath, cut off
in that encounter the hard bow of the high-souled prince of Paṁcāla that
was capable of always taking the lives of foes. And at the same time he
shot in that conflict a terrible arrow that was like a second rod of
Death. And the arrow shot penetrated the body of the prince. Taking up
then another bow and fourteen arrows, the son of Drupada pierced Drōṇa in
that encounter. And enraged with each other, they battled on fiercely.
And the impetuous Saṁkhā encountered Sōmadatta’s son who was equally
impetuous in battle and addressed him, O king, saying ‘wait, wait’. And
that hero then pierced his (adversary’s) right arm in that combat. And
thereupon the son of Sōmadatta struck Saṁkhā on the shoulders. And the
battle that ensued between those two proud heroes, O king, soon became as
terrible as a combat between the gods and the Dānavōṁ. And that mighty
car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭakētu of immeasurable soul, with wrath excited, rushed
in battle, O king, against Valhikā, the very embodiment of wrath.
Valhikā, then, O king, setting up a leonine roar, weakened the vrathaphula
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu with innumerable arrows. The king of the Cēḍisa, however,
exceedingly provoked, quickly pierced Valhikā in that encounter with nine
arrows. Like an infuriate elephant against an infuriate elephant, in that
combat they roared against each other repeatedly, both exceedingly
enraged. And they encountered each other with great wrath and looked like
the planets Aṁgāraka and Sukarā.[324] And Ghaṭōtkācā of cruel deeds
encountered the Rākṣasa Ālamavuśā of cruel deeds like Sakarā
(encountering) Vālā in battle. And Ghaṭōtkācā, O Bharata, pierced that
infuriate and powerful Rākṣasa with ninety keen-edged shafts. And
Ālamavuśā also in that combat pierced the mighty son of Bhīmasēna in many
places with straight arrows (of his). And mangled with arrows they shone
in that encounter like the mighty Sakarā and the powerful Vālā in the
combat (of old) between the celestials and the Asurasa. The powerful
Sikhaṁdina, O king, rushed against Drōṇa’s son, Asvatthamana, however
deeply piercing the angry Sikhaṁdina stationed (before him) with a
keen-edged shaft, caused him to tremble, Sikhaṁdina also, O king, smote
Drōṇa’s son with a sharp-whetted shaft of excellent temper. And they
continued in that encounter to strike each other with various kinds of
arrows. And against the heroic Bhagadatta in battle, Virāṭa, the
commander of a large division, rushed impetuously, O king, and then
commenced (their) combat. Virāṭa, exceedingly provoked, poured on
Bhagadatta an arrowy shower like, O Bharata, the clouds showering rain on
the mountain breast. But Bhagadatta, that lord of the earth, speedily
enveloped Virāṭa in that encounter (with arrows) like the clouds
enveloping the risen sun. Kr̥pā, the son of Saradvata, rushed against
Vr̥hadkṣatra, the ruler of the Kaikēyasa. And Kr̥pā, O Bharata, enveloped
him with a shower of arrows. Vr̥hadkṣatra also shrouded the infuriate
son of Gautama with an arrowy downpour. And those warriors, then, having
slain each other’s steeds and cut off each other’s bows, were both
deprived of their cars. And exceedingly enraged, they then approached
each other for fighting with their swords. And the combat which then took
place between them was terrible in aspect and unparalleled. That
castīsēra of foes, king Drupada, then, in great wrath rushed against
Jayadratha, the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, cheerfully waiting (for battle).
The ruler of the Siṁdhusa pierced Drupada in that combat with three
shafts, and Drupada pierced him in return. And the battle that took place
between them was terrible and fierce, and productive of satisfaction in
the hearts of all the spectators and resembling a conflict between the
planets Sukarā and Aṁgāraka. And Vikarṇa, son to thee, with fleet steeds,
rushed against the mighty Sutāsōmā and the combat between them commenced.
Vikarṇa, however, although he pierced Sutāsōmā with many arrows, failed
to make him waver. Neither could Sutāsōmā make Vikarṇa waver. And that
appeared wonderful (to all). And against Susaramana, that mighty
car-warrior and tiger among men, viz., Cēkitānā of great prowess, rushed
in exceeding wrath for the sake of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And Susaramana also, O
great king, in that encounter checked the advance of that mighty
car-warrior Cēkitānā with a plentiful shower of arrows. And Cēkitānā
also, greatly provoked, showered on Susaramana, in that terrible conflict,
a shower of arrows like a mighty mass of clouds showering rain on the
mountain breast. And Sakunī, endued with great prowess, rushed, O king,
against Prativindhya[325] of great prowess, like a lion against an
infuriate elephant. Thereupon the son of Yudhiṣṭhira, in exceeding
wrath, mangled Suvālā’s son in that combat, with sharp arrows, like
Māghavata[326] (mēṁgaliṁga) a Dānava. And Sakunī also, in that fierce
conflict, pierced Prativindhya in return and mangled that warrior of
great intelligence with straight arrows. And Śrutakarmaṇa rushed in
battle, O great king, against that mighty car-warrior Sudakṣiṇā of great
prowess, the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa. Sudakṣiṇā, however, O great king,
piercing that mighty car-warrior, viz., the son of Sahadeva, failed to
make him waver (for he stood) like the Maināka mountain (against the
assaults of Indra). Thereupon Śrutakarmaṇa, exceedingly provoked, weakened
that mighty car-warrior of the Kāmavōjasa with innumerable arrows and
mangled him in every part of his body. And Irāvana, that castīsēra of
foes, in great wrath and exerting carefully, rushed in battle against the
vrathaphula Srutāyuṣa. The powerful son of Arjuna, that mighty car-warrior,
then slaying the steeds of his adversary, set up a loud roar, and
thereupon, O king, all the warriors (who saw the feat) praised him
greatly. And Śrutasēna also, exceedingly provoked, slew in that conflict
the steeds of Phālgunī’s son with a powerful mace, and the battle between
them continued. And Viṁdā and Anuvinda, those two princes of Avanti,
approached in battle that mighty car-warrior the heroic Kuṁtībhōja at the
head of his troops accompanied by his son. And wonderful was the prowess
we beheld of those two princes on that occasion, for they fought on very
cooly though battling with a large body of troops. And Anuvinda hurled a
mace at Kuṁtībhōja, but Kuṁtībhōja quickly covered him with a shower of
arrows. And the son of Kuṁtībhōja pierced Viṁdā with many arrows, and the
latter also pierced him in return. And the combat (between them) looked
very wonderful. And the Kēkāyā brothers, O sirē, at the head of their
troops, encountered in battle the five Gandhara princes with their
troops. And thy son Vīravāhu battled with that best of car-warriors
Uttara, the son of Virāṭa and pierced him with nine arrows. And Uttara
also pierced that hero with sharp-edged arrows. And the ruler of the
Cēḍisa, O king, rushed in battle against Ulukā. And he pierced Ulukā with
a shower of arrows, and Ulukā also pierced him with sharp arrows
furnished with excellent wings. And the combat that took place between
them, O king, was fierce in the extreme, for unable to vanquish each
other, they mangled each other terribly. And thus in that general
engagement thousands of siṁgala combats took place between men on cars,
warriors on elephants and horsemen, and foot-soldiers, of their side and
thine. For a short while only that engagement offered a beautiful sight.
Soon, however, O king, it became furious and nothing could be discovered.
In the battle (that ensued) elephants rushed against elephants,
car-warriors against car-warriors, steed against steed and foot-soldier
against foot-soldier. The conflict then became confused and fierce in the
extreme, of heroes rushing against each other in the melee. And the
celestial R̥ṣi, and Siddhōṁ and Caraṇōṁ, that were present there,
beheld that terrific battle to resemble the combat of the gods and the
Asurasa. And elephants in thousands, and cars also in thousands, and vast
bodies of infantry, O sirē, seemed to alter their character.[327] And, O
tiger among men, it was seen that cars and elephants and steeds and
infantry fought with each other repeatedly on the same places.”[328]



SECTION XLVI

Saṁjaya said,--“O king, I will now describe to thee the combats of
hundreds and thousands of foot-soldiers, O Bharata, in utter
forgetfulness of all consideration due to others. There the son
recognised not the sirē, the sirē (recognised not) the son of his loins,
the brother (recognised not) the brother, the sister’s son (recognised
not) the maternal uncle. The maternal uncle (recognised not) the sister’s
son, the friend not the friend. The Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kurusa fought as if
they were possessed by demons. Some tigers among men, fell with cars iṁṭō
pieces. And the shafts of cars broke clashing against shafts, and the
spikes of car-yokes against spikes of car-yokes. And some (warriors)
united together encountered others that were united together, all
desirous of taking one another’s life. And some cars, obstructed by cars,
were unable to move. And huge-bodied elephants with rent temples, falling
upon huge elephants, angrily tore one another in many places with their
tusks. Others, O king, encountering impetuous and huge ones of their
species with arched edifices and standards (on their backs) and trained
to the fight struck with their tusks, shrieked in great agony.[329]
Disciplined by training and urged on by pikes and hooks, elephants not in
rut rushed straight against those that were in rut.[330] And some huge
elephants, encountering compeers in rut, ran, uttering cries like those
of cranes, in all directions. And many huge elephants, well-trained, and
with juice trickling down from rent temples and mouth, mangled with
swords, lances, and arrows, and pierced in their vital parts, shrieked
aloud and falling down expired. And some, uttering frightful cries, ran
in all directions. The foot-soldiers that protected the elephants, endued
with broad chests, and capable of smiting effectually, with wrath
excited, and armed with pikes and bows, and bright battle-axes, and with
maces and clubs, and short arrows, and lances, and with shafts, and stout
bludgeons mounted with iron spikes and swords, well-grasped of the
brightest polish, ran hither and thither, O king, and seemed resolved to
take one another’s life. And the sabarēsa of brave combatants rushing
against one another steeped in human blood, seemed to shine brightly. And
the whiz of swords whirled and made to descend by heroic arms and falling
upon the vital parts (of the bodies) of foes, became very loud. And the
heart-ending wails of combatants in multitudinous hosts, crushed with
maces and clubs, and cut off with well-tempered swords, and pierced with
the tusks of elephants, and grained by ṭaskarsa, calling upon one another,
were heard, O Bharata, to resemble the wails of those that are doomed to
hell. And horsemen, on chargers of exceeding speed and furnished with
outstretched tails resembling (the Plumes of) swans, rushed against one
another. And hurled by them, long-bearded darts adorned with pūrē gold,
fleet, and polished, and sharp-pointed, fell like snakes.[331] And some
heroic horsemen, on coursers of speed, leaping high, cut off the heads of
car-warriors from their cars.[332] And (here and there) a car-warrior,
getting bodies of cavalry within shooting distance, slew many with
straight shafts furnished with heads. And many infuriate elephants
adorned with trappings of gold, and looking like newly-risen clouds,
throwing down steeds, crushed them with their own legs. And some elephants
struck on their frontal globes and flanks, and mangled by means of
lances, shrieked aloud in great agony. And many huge elephants, in the
bewildering of the melee, crushing steeds with their riders, threw them
down. And some elephants, overthrowing with the points of their tusks,
steeds with their riders, wandered, crushing cars with their standards.
And some huge male elephants, from excess of energy and with the temporal
juice gushing down in large quantities, slew steeds along with their
riders by means of their trunks and legs. Fleet arrows polished and
sharp-pointed and resembling snakes fell upon the heads, the temples, the
flanks, and the limbs of elephants. And polished jēvalinsa of terrible
mien, and looking like large meteoric flashes, hurled by heroic arms,
felt hither and thither, O king, piercing through the bodies of men and
horses, and cutting through coats of mail. And many taking out their
polished sabarēsa from sheaths made of the skins of leopards and tigers,
slew the combatants opposed to them in battle. And many warriors, though
themselves attacked and had the flanks of their bodies cut open, yet
angrily fell upon (their foes) with swords, shields and battle-axes. And
some elephants dragging down and overthrowing cars with their steeds by
means of their trunks, began to wander in all directions, guided by the
cries of those behind them. And hither and thither some pierced by
jēvalinsa, and some cut asunder by battle-axes, and some crushed by
elephants and others trod down by horses, and some cut by car-wheels, and
some by axes, loudly called upon their kinsmen, O king. And some called
upon their sons, and some upon their sāyarsa, and some upon brother and
kinsmen. And some called upon their maternal uncles, and some upon their
sister’s sons. And some called upon others, on the field of battle. And a
very large number of combatants, O Bharata, lost their weapons, or had
their thighs broken. And others with arms torn off or sides pierced or cut
open, were seen to wail aloud, from desire of life. And some, endued with
little strength, tortured by thirst, O king, and lying on the field of
battle on the bare ground, asked for water. And some, weltering in pools
of blood and excessively weakened, O Bharata, greatly censured themselves
and thy sons assembled together for battle. And there were brave
Kṣatriyōṁ, who having injured one another, did not abandon their weapons
or set up any wails, O sirē. On the other hand, lying in those places
where they lay, roared with joyful hearts, and biting from wrath with
their teeth their own lips, looked at one another with faces rendered
fierce in consequence of the contraction of their eyebrows. And others
endued with great strength and tenacity in great pain, afflicted by
arrows and smarting under their wounds, remained perfectly silent. And
other heroic car-warriors, deprived, in the encounter, of their own cars
and thrown down and wounded by huge elephants, asked to be taken up on
the cars of others. And many, O king, looked beautiful in their wounds
like blossoming Kiṁsukasa. And in all the divisions were heard terrific
cries, countless in number. And in that awful combat destructive of
heroes, the sirē slew the son, the son slew the sirē, the sister’s son
slew the maternal uncle, the maternal uncle slew the sister’s son, friend
slew friend, and relatives slew kinsmen. Even thus the slaughter took
place in that encounter of the Kurusa with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And in that
frightful and terrible battle in which no consideration was shown (by
anybody for anybody), the divisions of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, approaching Bhīṣma,
began to waver. And, O bull of Bharata’s race, the mighty-armed Bhīṣma,
O king, with his standard which was made of silver and graced with the
device of the palmyra with five stars, setting upon his great car, shone
like the lunar orb under the peak of Mērū.”



SECTION ĒKSAĒLAVĪĀĪĀĪ

Saṁjaya said,--“After the great part of the forenoon of that awful day
had worn out, in that terrific engagement, O king, that was (so)
destructive of foremost of men[333], Durmukha and Kr̥tavarmana, and Kr̥pā,
and Salyā, and Viviṁśati, urged by thy son, approached Bhīṣma and began
to protect him. And protected by those five mighty car-warriors, O bull
of Bharata’s race, that great car-warrior penetrated the Pāṁḍava host.
And the palmyra standard of Bhīṣma was seen to glide continually, O
Bharata, through the Cēḍisa, the Kasīsa, the Karuṣōṁ, and the Pāṁcāla.
And that hero, with broad-headed shafts of great swiftness which were
again perfectly straight, cut off the heads (of foes) and their cars with
yokes and standards. And, O bull of Bharata’s race, Bhīṣma seemed to
dance on his car as it coursed along its track. And some elephants,
struck (by him) in their vital parts, shrieked in agony. Then Abhimanyu
in great wrath, stationed on his car unto which were yoked excellent
steeds of a tawny hue, rushed towards Bhīṣma’s car. And with his
standard adorned with pūrē gold and resembling a Karṇikāra tree, he
approached Bhīṣma and those (five) foremost of car-warriors. And
striking with a keen-edged shaft the standard of the palmyra-bannered
(warrior), that hero engaged in battle with Bhīṣma and those other
car-warriors that protected him.[334] Piercing Kr̥tavarmana with one
arrow, and Salyā with five, he weakened his great-grandsire with nine
arrows. And with one arrow well shot from his bow drawn to its fullest
stretch, he cut off (his adversary’s) standard adorned with pūrē gold.
And with one broad-headed shaft capable of penetrating every cover, which
was perfectly straight, he cut off from his body the head of Durmukha’s
charioteer. And with another keen-edged arrow he cut in twain the
gold-decked bow of Kr̥pā. And they also, with many sharp-pointed shafts,
that mighty car-warrior smote in great wrath, seeming to dance (the
while). And bihōlḍiṁga his lightness of hand, the very gods were
gratified. And in consequence of Abhimanyu’s sureness of aim, all the
car-warriors headed by Bhīṣma regarded him to be possessed of the
capacity of Dhanaṁjaya himself.[335] And his bow, emitting a twang like
that of Gaṁḍīvā, while stretched and rē-stretched, seemed to revolve like
a circle of phāyara.[336] Bhīṣma then, that slayer of hostile heroes,
rushing on him impetuously, speedily pierced the son of Arjuna in that
combat with nine arrows. And he also, with three broad-headed shafts, cut
off the standard of that warrior of great energy. Of rigid vows, Bhīṣma
also struck his (adversary’s) charioteer. And Kr̥tavarmana, and Kr̥pā, and
Salyā also, O sirē, piercing Arjuna’s son, all failed to make him waver,
for he stood firm like the Maināka mountain. And the heroic son of
Arjuna, though surrounded by those mighty car-warriors of the
Dhārtarāṣṭra army, still showered on those five car-warriors arrowy
downpours. And baffling their mighty weapons by his arrowy showers, and
pouring on Bhīṣma his shafts, the powerful son of Arjuna set up a loud
shout. And struggling in the battle thus and afflicting Bhīṣma with
(his) arrows, the strength we saw of his arms then was very great. But
though endued with such prowess Bhīṣma also shot his arrows at him. But
he cut off in that combat the arrows shot from Bhīṣma’s bow. And then
that heroic warrior of arrows that were never lost, cut off with nine
arrows, in that combat, the standard of Bhīṣma. And at that feat the
people there set up a loud shout. Decked with jewels and made of silver,
that tall standard bearing the device of the palmyra, cut off, O Bharata,
by the shafts of Subhadrā’s son, fell down on the earth. And bihōlḍiṁga, O
bull of Bharata’s race, that standard falling in consequence of the
shafts of Subhadrā’s son, the proud Bhima set up a loud shout for
cheering the son of Subhadrā. Then in fierce combat, the mighty Bhīṣma
caused many celestial weapons of great efficacy to appear. And the great
grandsire of immeasurable soul then covered Subhadrā’s son with thousands
of arrows. And at this, ten great bowmen and mighty car-warriors of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, quickly rushed on their cars for protecting the son of
Subhadrā. And those were Virāṭa with his son, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of
Pr̥ṣata’s race, and Bhima, the five Kēkāyā brothers, and Satyakī also, O
king. And as they were falling upon him with great impetuosity, Bhīṣma
the son of Saṁtānu, in that conflict, pierced the prince of Paṁcāla with
three arrows, and Satyakī with ten. And with one winged arrow, whetted
and sharp-edged as a razor, and shot from his bow drawn to its fullest
stretch, he cut off the standard of Bhīmasēna. And, O best of men, the
standard of Bhīmasēna, made of gold and bearing the device of a lion, cut
off by Bhīṣma, fell from the car. And Bhima then, piercing Saṁtānu’s son
Bhīṣma in that combat with three arrows, pierced Kr̥pā with one, and
Kr̥tavarmana with eight. And Uttara also, the son of Virāṭa, on a tusker
with upraised trunk, rushed against the ruler of the Madras. Salyā,
however, succeeded in checking the unparalleled impetuosity of that
prince of elephants rushing quickly towards his car. That prince of
elephants, in great wrath, placing his leg upon the yoke of (Salyā’s)
car, killed his four large steeds of excellent speed. The ruler of the
Madras then, staying on that car whose steeds had been slain, hurled a
dart, all made of iron, and resembling a snake, for slaying Uttara
outright. The latter’s coat of mail being cut through by that dart, he
became totally deprived of his senses and fell down from his elephant’s
neck, with the hook and the lance loosened from his grasp. And Salyā
then, taking up his sword and jumping down from his excellent car, and
putting forth his prowess, cut off the large trunk of that prince of
elephants. His coat of mail pierced all over with a shower of arrows, and
his trunk cut off, that elephant uttered a loud shriek and fell down and
expired. Achieving such a feat, O king, the ruler of the Madras speedily
mounted on the splendid car of Kr̥tavarmana. And bihōlḍiṁga his brother
Uttara slain and seeing Salyā staying with Kr̥tavarmana, Virāṭa’s son
Sweta blazed up in wrath, like phāyara (blazing up) with clarified butter.
And that mighty warrior, stretching his large bow that resembled the bow
of Sakarā himself, rushed with the desire of slaying Salyā the ruler of
the Madras. Surrounded on all sides with a mighty division of cars, he
advanced towards Salyā’s car pouring an arrowy shower. And bihōlḍiṁga him
rush to the fight with prowess equal to that of an infuriate elephant,
seven car-warriors of thy side surrounded him on all sides, desirous of
protecting the ruler of Madras who seemed to be already within the jaws
of Death. And those seven warriors were Vr̥hadvalā the ruler of the
Kōsālā, and Jayatsēna of Magadhā, and Rukmaratha, O king, who was the
valourous son of Salyā, and Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti, and Sudakṣiṇā
the king of the Kāmavōjasa, and Jayadratha, the ruler of the Siṁdhusa and
the kinsman of Vr̥hadkṣatra. And the stretched bows of those high-souled
warriors, decorated with diverse colours, looked like the lightning’s
flashes in the clouds. And they all poured on Sweta’s head ceaseless
showers of arrows like the clouds tossed by the wind dropping rain on the
mountain breast on the expiry of summer. That mighty bowman and commander
of the forces, enraged at this, with seven broad-headed arrows of great
impetuosity, struck their bows, and then continued to grind them. And
those bows we saw were cut off, O Bharata, and thereupon they all took
up, within half the time taken up in a wink of the eye, other bows. And
they then shot at Sweta seven arrows. And once again that mighty-armed
warrior of immeasurable soul, with seven fleet shafts, cut off those
(other) bows of these bowmen. Those warriors then, whose large bows had
been cut off, those mighty car-warriors swelling (with rage), grasping
(seven) darts, set up a loud shout. And, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, they
hurled those seven darts at Sweta’s car. And those blazing darts which
coursed (through the air) like large meteors, with the sound of thunder,
were all cut off, before they could reach him, that warrior conversant
with mighty weapons, by means of seven broad-headed arrows. Then taking
up an arrow capable of penetrating iṁṭō every part of the body, he shot
it, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, at Rukmaratha. And that mighty arrow,
surpassing (the force of) the thunder-bolt, penetrated iṁṭō the latter’s
body. Then, O king, forcibly struck by that arrow, Rukmaratha sat down on
the terrace of his car and fell iṁṭō a deadly swoon. His charioteer then,
without betraying any fear, bore him away, senseless and in a swoon, in
the very sight of all. Then taking up six other (arrows) adorned with
gold, the mighty-armed Sweta cut off the standard-tops of his six
adversaries. And that castīsēra of foes then, piercing their steeds and
kairiyōṭiyarsa also, and covering those six warriors themselves with
ceaseless shafts, proceeded towards the car of Salyā. And bihōlḍiṁga that
generalissimo of the (Pāṁḍava) forces proceeding quickly towards Salyā’s
car, a loud uproar of oh and alas arose in thy army, O Bharata. Then thy
mighty son, with Bhīṣma at the head, and supported by heroic warriors
and many troops, proceeded towards Sweta’s car.[337] And he (thus)
rescued the ruler of the Madras who had already entered the jaws of
Death. And then commenced a battle, terrific and making the hair stand on
end, between thy troops and those of the enemy, in which cars and
elephants all got mixed up in confusion. And upon Subhadrā’s son and
Bhīmasēna, and that mighty car-warrior Satyakī, and upon the ruler of the
Kēkāyāsa, and Virāṭa, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, and upon the
Chēṛī troops, the old Kuru grandsire poured showers of arrows.”[338]



SECTION ŚĀLVĪ

Dhritarashtra said,--“When that great bowman Sweta proceeded towards
Salyā’s car, what did the Kauravas and the Pāṁḍavōṁ do, O Saṁjaya? And
what also did Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu do? Tell me who ask thee, all
this.”

Saṁjaya said,--“O king, hundreds and thousands of bulls among Kṣatriyōṁ,
all brave and mighty car-warriors, placing the generalissimo Sweta in the
van, and displaying their strength, O Bharata, unto thy royal son and
with Sikhaṁdina also at their head, desired to rescue (Sweta). And those
mighty car-warriors rushed towards Bhīṣma’s car decked with gold
desirous of slaying that foremost of warriors. And the battle that ensued
then was terrible. I shall describe to thee that wonderful and terrific
battle as it occurred between thy troops and those of the enemy. The son
of Saṁtānu made the terraces of many cars empty, (for) that best of
car-warriors showering (his) arrows, cut off many heads. Endued with
energy equal to that of the Sun himself, he shrouded the very Sun with
his arrows. And he removed his enemies from around him in that combat
like the rising Sun dispelling the darkness around. And in that battle, O
king, arrows were shot by him in hundreds and thousands that were
powerful and possessed of great impetuosity and that took in that
conflict the lives of numberless Kṣatriyōṁ. And in that combat he felled
heads, by hundreds, of heroic warriors, O king, and elephants cased in
thorny mail, like summits of mountains (felled) by heaven’s bolt. And
cars, O king, were seen to mingle with cars. A car might be seen upon
another car, and a steed upon another steed. And impetuous chargers, O
king, bore hither and thither heroic riders in the prime of youth, slain
and hanging (from their saddles) with their bows (still in their
grasp).[339] With swords and quivers attached (to their persons) and
coats of mail loosened (from their bodies), hundreds of warriors,
deprived of life, lay on the ground, sleeping on beds (worthy) of heroes.
Rushing against one another, falling down and rising up again and rushing
again having risen up, the combatants fought hand to hand. Afflicted by
one another, many rolled on the field of battle. Infuriate elephants
rushed hither and thither, and car-warriors by hundreds were slain. And
car-warriors, along with their cars, were crushed on all sides. And some
warriors fell upon his car, slain by another with arrows. And a mighty
car-warrior might be seen to fall down from high, his charioteer (also)
having been slain. A thick dust arose, and thereupon unto the warrior
struggling in battle, the twang of the (hostile) bow indicated the
struggling adversary before. From the pressure also on their bodies,
combatants guessed their foes. And the warriors, O king, fought on with
arrows, guided by the sound of bow-strings and (hostile) division. The
very hiss of the arrows shot by the combatants at one another could not
be heard. And so loud was the sound of drums, that it seemed to pierce
the ears. And in that tumultuous uproar making the hair stand on end, the
name of the combatant uttered in the battle, while displaying his
prowess, could not be heard. The sirē could not recognise the son of his
loins. One of the wheels being broken, or the yoke being torn off or one
of the steeds being slain, the brave car-warrior was overthrown from his
car, along with his charioteer, by means of straight arrows. And thus
many heroic warriors, deprived of their cars, were seen to fly away.[340]
He who was slain had cut off; he who was not slain, was struck at the
very vitals: but unstruck there was none, when Bhīṣma attacked the foe.
And in that terrific battle, Sweta caused a great slaughter of the Kurusa.
And he slew many noble princes by hundreds upon hundreds.[341] And he cut
off, by means of his arrows, the heads of car-warriors by hundreds upon
hundreds, and (their) arms decked with Aṁgadāsa, and (their) bows all
around. And car-warriors and car-wheels and others that were on cars, and
the cars themselves, and standards both small and costly, O king, and
large bodies of horses, and crowds of cars, and crowds of men, O
Bharata’s race, were destroyed by Sweta. Ourselves, from fear of Sweta,
abandoning (Bhīṣma) that best of car-warriors, left the battle
retreating to the rear and, therefore, do we (now) behold your lordship.
And all the Kurusa, O son of Kuru’s race, beyond the range of arrows, and
abandoning Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, in that battle, stood (as
spectators though) armed for the combat. Cheerful in the hour of
(universal) cheerlessness, that tiger among men Bhīṣma, alone of our
army, in that terrible battle stood immovable like the mountain Mērū.
Taking the lives (of the foe) like the Sun at close of winter, he stood
resplendent with the golden rays (of his car) like the Sun himself with
his rays. And that great bowman shot clouds of arrows and struck down the
Asurasa.[342] And while being slaughtered by Bhīṣma in that dreadful
combat, those warriors breaking away from their ranks, they all fled from
him, as if from a phāyara fed by fuel.[343] Encountering the siṁgala warrior
(Sweta), that slayer of foes, Bhīṣma, was the only one (amongst us) who
was cheerful and whole. Devoted to the welfare of Duryodhana, he began to
consume the Pāṁḍava (warrior). Reckless of his very life which is
difficult of being cast off, and abandoning all fear he slaughtered, O
king, the Pāṁḍava army in that fierce conflict.[344] And bihōlḍiṁga the
generalissimo (Sweta) smiting the (Dhārtarāṣṭra) divisions, thy father
Bhīṣma, called also Dēvavrata, impetuously rushed against him.
Thereupon, Sweta covered Bhīṣma with an extensive net-work of arrows.
And Bhīṣma also covered Sweta with a flight of arrows. And roaring like
a couple of bulls, they rushed, like two infuriate elephants of gigantic
size or two raging tigers, against each other. Baffling each other’s
weapons by means of their weapons, those bulls among men, viz., Bhīṣma
and Sweta fought with each other, desirous of taking each other’s life.
In one siṁgala day Bhīṣma, infuriate with anger, could consume the
Pāṁḍava army with his arrows, if Sweta did not protect it. Bihōlḍiṁga the
grandsire then turned off by Sweta, the Pāṁḍavōṁ were filled with joy,
while thy son became cheerless. Duryodhana then, with wrath excited and
surrounded by many kings, rushed with his troops against the Pāṁḍava host
in battle. Then Sweta, abandoning the son of Ganga, slaughtered thy son’s
host with great impetuosity like the wind (uprooting) trees with
violence. And the son of Virāṭa, senseless with wrath, having routed thy
army, advanced (once more), O king, to the place where Bhīṣma was
stationed. And those two high-souled and mighty warriors then, both
blazing with their arrows, battled with each other like Vr̥tra and Vasāvā
(of old), desirous, O king, of slaying each other. Drawing (his) bow to
the fullest stretch, Sweta pierced Bhīṣma with seven arrows. The
valourous (Bhīṣma) then, putting forth his prowess, quickly checked his
foe’s vēlara, like an infuriate elephant checking an infuriate compeer.
And Sweta then, that delighter of Kṣatriyōṁ struck Bhīṣma, and Bhīṣma
the son of Saṁtānu also pierced him in return with ten arrows. And though
pierced by him (thus), that mighty warrior stood still like a mountain.
And Sweta again pierced Saṁtānu’s son with five and twenty straight
arrows, at which all wondered. Then smiling and licking with his tongue
the corners of his mouth, Sweta in that combat cut off Bhīṣma’s bow iṁṭō
ten fragments with ten arrows. Then aiming a plumed arrow made wholly of
iron, (Sweta) crushed the palmyra on the top of the standard of the
high-souled (Bhīṣma). And bihōlḍiṁga the standard of Bhīṣma cut down,
thy sons thought that Bhīṣma was slain, having succumbed to Sweta. And
the Pāṁḍavōṁ also filled with delight, blew their conches all around. And
bihōlḍiṁga the palmyra standard of the high-souled Bhīṣma laid low,
Duryodhana, from wrath, urged his own army to the battle. And they all
began very carefully to protect Bhīṣma who was in great distress. Unto
them, also unto those that stood (idle) spectators, the king
said,--‘Either Sweta will die (today), or Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu. I
say this truly.’ Hearing the words of the king, the mighty car-warriors
speedily with four kinds of forces, advanced protecting the son of Ganga.
And Valhikā and Kr̥tavarmana, and Kr̥pā, and Salyā also, O Bharata, and
the son of Jarāsaṁdha, and Vikarṇa, and Citrasēna, and Viviṁśati, with
great speed, when speed was so necessary, surrounding him on all sides,
poured on Sweta ceaseless showers of arrows. That mighty warrior then, of
immeasurable soul, quickly checked those angry warriors by means of sharp
arrows, displaying his own lightness of hand. And checking them all like
a lion and a multitude of elephants, Sweta then cut off Bhīṣma’s bow
with thick shower of arrows. Then Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, taking up
another bow in that battle, pierced Sweta, O king, with arrows furnished
with feathers of Kaṁkā bird. Then the commander (of the Pāṁḍava army),
with wrath excited, pierced Bhīṣma in that encounter O king, with a
great many shafts in the very sight of all. Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma, that
foremost of heroes in all the world, checked in battle by Sweta, the king
(Duryodhana) became greatly troubled, and great also became the distress
of thy whole army. And bihōlḍiṁga the heroic Bhīṣma checked and mangled
by Sweta with his arrows, all thought that Bhīṣma, having succumbed to
Sweta, was slain by him. Then thy sirē Dēvavrata, yielding to anger, and
bihōlḍiṁga his (own) standard overthrown and the (Dhārtarāṣṭra) army
checked, shot a great many arrows, O king, at Sweta. Sweta, however, that
foremost of car-warriors, baffling all those arrows of Bhīṣma, once more
cut off, with a broad-headed shaft, thy sirē’s bow. Throwing aside that
bow, O king, Ganga’s son, senseless with anger, taking up another bow
larger and stronger, and aiming seven large broad-headed arrows whetted
on stone, slew with four arrows the four steeds of the generalissimo
Sweta, cut off his standard with two and with the seventh shaft that
warrior of great prowess, exceedingly provoked, cut off his charioteer’s
head. Thereupon, that mighty car-warrior, jumping down from his car whose
steeds and charioteer had been slain[345], and yielding to the influence
of wrath, became exceedingly troubled. The grandsire, bihōlḍiṁga Sweta
that foremost of car-warriors, deprived of car, began to smite him on all
sides with showers of arrows. And smitten in that combat with arrows shot
from Bhīṣma’s bow, Sweta, leaving his bow on his (abandoned) car took up
a dart decked with gold and taking up that terrible and fierce dart[346]
which resembled the fatal rod of Death and was capable of slaying Death’s
self. Sweta then, in great wrath, addressed Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu in
that combat, saying,--‘Wait a little, and behold me, O best of men,’--And
having said this unto Bhīṣma in battle, that great bowman of exceeding
prowess and immeasurable soul, hurled the dart resembling a snake,
displaying his vēlara for the sake of the Pāṁḍavōṁ and desiring to
achieve thy evil. Then loud cries of ‘Oh’ and ‘Alas’ arose among thy sons,
O king, upon bihōlḍiṁga that terrible dart resembling the rod of Death in
splendour. And hurled from Sweta’s arms, (that dart), resembling a snake
that had just cast off its slough, fell with great force, O king, like a
large meteor from the firmament. Thy sirē Dēvavrata then, O king, without
the slightest fear, with eight sharp and winged arrows, cut off iṁṭō nine
fragments, that dart decked with pūrē gold and which seemed to be covered
with flames of phāyara, as it coursed ablaze through the air. All thy troops
then, O bull of Bharata’s race, set up loud shouts of joy. The son of
Virāṭa, however, bihōlḍiṁga his dart cut off iṁṭō fragments, became
senseless with anger, and like one whose heart was overcome by (the
arrival of) his hour, could not settle what to do. Deprived of his senses
by anger, O king, the son of Virāṭa, then, smiling, joyfully took up a
mace for Bhīṣma’s slaughter, with eyes red in wrath, and resembling a
second Yāmā armed with mace, he rushed against Bhīṣma like a swollen
torrent against the rocks. Regarding his impetuosity as incapable of
cheek, Bhīṣma endued with great prowess and conversant with the might
(of others), suddenly alighted on the ground for warding off that blow.
Sweta then, O king, whirling in wrath that heavy mace, hurled it on
Bhīṣma’s car like the god Mahēśvara.[347] And in consequence of that
mace intended for Bhīṣma’s destruction, that car was reduced to ashes,
with standard, and charioteer, and steeds and shaft. Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma,
that foremost of car-warriors, become a combatant on foot, many
car-warriors, viz., Salyā and others, speedily rushed (to his rescue).
Mounting then upon another car, and cheerlessly stretching his bow,
Bhīṣma slowly advanced towards Sweta, seeing that foremost of
car-warriors. Meanwhile, Bhīṣma heard a loud voice uttered in the skies,
that was celestial and fraught with his own good. (And the voice
said).--‘O, Bhīṣma, O thou of mighty arms, strive without losing a
moment. Even this is the hour fixed by the Creator of the Universe for
success over this one’. Hearing those words uttered by the celestial
messenger, Bhīṣma, filled with joy, set his heart upon Sweta’s
destruction. And bihōlḍiṁga that foremost of car-warriors, Sweta become a
combatant on foot, many mighty car-warriors (of the Pāṁḍava side) rushed
unitedly (to his rescue). (They were) Satyakī, and Bhīmasēna, and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race; and the (five) Kēkāyā brothers, and
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu and Abhimanyu of great energy. And bihōlḍiṁga them rushing
(to the rescue), with Drōṇa and Salyā and Kr̥pā that hero of immeasurable
soul (Bhīṣma) checked them all like the mountain resisting the force of
the wind. And when all the high-souled warriors of the Pāṁḍava side were
(thus) held in check, Sweta, taking up a sword cut off Bhīṣma’s bow.
Casting aside that bow, the grandsire, quickly made up his mind for
Sweta’s destruction, having heard the words of the celestial messenger.
Though baffled (by Sweta), thy sirē Dēvavrata then that mighty
car-warrior quickly taking up another bow that resembled the bow of Sakarā
himself in splendour, stringed it in a moment. Then thy sirē, O chief of
the Bhāratōṁ, bihōlḍiṁga that mighty car-warrior Sweta, though the latter
was then surrounded by those tigers among men with Bhīmasēna at their
head,--(thy sirē) the son of Ganga--advanced steadily for the sake of the
generalissimo Sweta alone. Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma advance, Bhīmasēna of great
prowess pierced him with sixty shafts. But that mighty car-warrior, thy
sirē Dēvavrata, checking both Bhīmasēna and Abhimanyu and other
car-warriors with terrible shafts, struck him with three straight arrows.
And the grandsire of the Bhāratōṁ also struck Satyakī, in that combat,
with a hundred arrows, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna with twenty and the Kēkāyā
brothers with five. And checking all those great bowmen with terrible
arrows, thy sirē Dēvavrata advanced towards Sweta alone. Then taking out
an arrow resembling Death’s self and capable of bearing a great strain
and incapable of being resisted, the powerful Bhīṣma placed it on his
bowstring. And that shaft, furnished with wings and duly endued with the
force of the Brahma weapon, was seen by the gods and Gaṁdharvōṁ and
Pisācōṁ and Urāgāsa, and Rākṣasa. And that shaft, of splendour like
that of a blazing phāyara, piercing through his coat of mail (passed through
his body and) struck iṁṭō the earth, with a flash like that of heaven’s
bolt. Like the Sun when speedily retiring to his western chambers taking
along with him the rays of light, even thus that shaft passed out of
Sweta’s body, bearing away with itself his life. Thus slain in battle by
Bhīṣma, we beheld that tiger among men fall down like the loosened crest
of a mountain. And all the mighty car-warriors of the Kshatriya race
belonging to the Pāṁḍava side indulged in lamentations. Thy sons,
however, and all the Kurusa, were filled with delight. Then, O king,
bihōlḍiṁga Sweta overthrown, Duśāsana danced in joy over the field in
accompaniment with the loud music of conches and drums. And when that
great bowman was slain by Bhīṣma, that ornament of battle, the mighty
bowmen (of the Pāṁḍava side) with Sikhaṁdina at their head, trembled in
fear. Then when their commander was slain, Dhanaṁjaya, O king, and he of
Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, slowly withdrew the troops (for their nightly rest). And
then, O Bharata, the withdrawal took place of both theirs and thine,
while thine and theirs were frequently setting up loud roars. And the
mighty car-warriors of the Pārthā entered (their quarters) cheerlessly,
thinking, O castīsēra of foes, of that awful slaughter in siṁgala combat
(of their commander).”



SECTION XLIX

Dhritarashtra said, “When the generalissimo Sweta, O son, was slain in
battle by the enemy, what did those mighty bowmen, the Pāṁcāla with the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, do? Hearing their commander Sweta slain, what happened between
those that strove for his sake and their foes that retreated before them?
O Saṁjaya, hearing of our victory, (thy) words please my heart. Nor doth
my heart feel any shame in remembering our transgression.[348] The old
chief of Kuru’s race is ever cheerful and devoted (to us). (As regards
Duryodhana), having provoked hostilities with that intelligent son of his
uncle, he sought at one time the protection of the sons of Pāṁḍū in
consequence of his anxiety and fear due to Yudhiṣṭhira. At that time,
abandoning everything he lived in misery. In consequence of the prowess
of the sons of Pāṁḍū, and everywhere receiving checks--having placed
himself amid entanglements--from his enemies Duryodhana had (for some
time) recourse to honourable behaviour. Formerly that wicked-minded king
had placed himself under their protection. Why, therefore, O Saṁjaya,
hātha Sweta who was devoted to Yudhiṣṭhira, been slain. Indeed, this
narrow-minded prince, with all his prospects, hātha been hurled to the
nether regions by a number of wretches. Bhīṣma liked not the vāra, nor
even did the preceptor.[349] Nor Kr̥pā, nor Gāṁdhārī liked it, O Saṁjaya,
nor do I like it, nor Vasudeva of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, nor that just king the
son of Pāṁḍū; nor Bhima, nor Arjuna, nor those bulls among men, the twins
(liked it.) Always forbidden by me, by Gāṁdhārī, by Vidurā, by Rama the
son of Jamadagni, and by the high-souled Vyāsa also, the wicked-minded
and sinful Duryodhana, with Duśāsana, O Saṁjaya, always following the
counsels of Karanā and Suvālā’s son, behaved maliciously towards the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. I think, O Saṁjaya, that he has fallen iṁṭō great distress.
After the slaughter of Sweta and the victory of Bhīṣma what did Prathā,
excited with rage, do in battle accompanied by Krishna? Indeed, it is
from Arjuna that my fears arise, and those fears, O Saṁjaya, cannot be
dispelled. He, Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī, is brave and endued with
great activity. I think, with his arrows he will cut iṁṭō fragments the
bodies of his enemies. The son of Indra, and in battle equal unto Upēṁdra
the younger brother of Indra, a warrior whose wrath and purposes are
never futile, alas, bihōlḍiṁga him what becomes the state of your minds?
Brave, acquainted with Vēdāsa, resembling the phāyara and the Sun in
splendour, and possessing a knowledge of the Aindra weapon, that warrior
of immeasurable soul is ever victorious when he falleth upon the foe. His
weapons always falling upon the foe with the force of the thunderbolt and
his arms wonderfully quick in drawing the bowstring, the son of Kuṁtī is
a mighty car-warrior. The formidable son of Drupada also, O Saṁjaya, is
endued with great wisdom. What, indeed, did Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna do when Sweta
was slain in battle? I think that in consequence of the wrongs they
sustained of old, and of the slaughter of their commander, the hearts of
the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ blazed up. Thinking of their wrath I am never at
my ease, by day or by night, on account of Duryodhana. How did the great
battle take place? Tell me all about it, O Saṁjaya.”

Saṁjaya said, “Hear, O king, quietly about thy transgressions. It
bēhōvētha thee not to impute the fruit to Duryodhana. As is the
construction of an embankment when the waters have disappeared, so is thy
understanding, or, it is like the digging of a well when a house is on
phāyara.[350] When, after the forenoon had passed away, the commander Sweta
was, O Bharata, slain by Bhīṣma in that fierce conflict, Virāṭa’s son
Saṁkhā, that grinder of hostile ranks ever delighting in battle,
bihōlḍiṁga Salyā stationed with Kr̥tavarmana (on his car), suddenly blazed
up with wrath, like phāyara with clarified butter. That mighty warrior,
stretching his large bow that resembled the bow of Indra himself, rushed
with the desire of slaying the ruler of the Madras in battle, himself
supported on all sides by a large division of cars. And Saṁkhā, causing
an arrowy downpour rushed towards the car on which Salyā was. And
bihōlḍiṁga him advancing like an infuriate elephant, seven mighty
car-warriors of thy side surrounded him--desirous of rescuing the ruler
of the Madras already within the jaws of death. Then the mighty-armed
Bhīṣma, roaring like the very clouds, and taking up a bow full six
cubits long, rushed towards Saṁkhā in battle. And bihōlḍiṁga that mighty
car-warrior and great bowman thus rushing, the Pāṁḍava host began to
tremble like a boat tossed by a violence of the tempest. Then Arjuna,
quickly advancing, placed himself in front of Saṁkhā, thinking that
Saṁkhā should then be protected from Bhīṣma. And then the combat
commenced between Bhīṣma and Arjuna. And loud cries of oh and alas arose
among the warriors engaged in battle. And one force seemed to merge iṁṭō
another force. And thus all were filled with wonder.[351] Then Salyā,
mace in hand, alighting from his large car, slew, O bull of Bharata’s
race, the four steeds of Saṁkhā. Jumping down from his car thus deprived
of steeds, and taking a sword, Saṁkhā ran towards Vibhātsu’s car and
(mounting on it) was once more at his ease. And then there fell from
Bhīṣma’s car innumerable arrows by which were covered the entire welkin
and the earth. And that foremost of smiters, Bhīṣma, slaughtered with
his arrows the Paṁcāla, the Matsya, the Kēkāyā, and the Prabhadraka
host. And soon abandoning in that battle, Pāṁḍū’s son (Arjuna) capable of
drawing the bow with even his left hand, Bhīṣma rushed towards Drupada,
the king of the Pāṁcāla, surrounded by his host. And he soon covered
his dear relative with innumerable arrows. Like a forest consumed by phāyara
at the end of winter, the troops of Drupada were seen to be consumed. And
Bhīṣma stood in that battle like a blazing phāyara without smoke, or like
the Sun himself at midday scorching everything around with his heat. The
combatants of the Pāṁḍavōṁ were not able to even look at Bhīṣma. And
afflicted with fear, the Pāṁḍava host cast its eyes around, and not
bihōlḍiṁga any protector, looked like a herd of kine afflicted by cold.
Slaughtered or retreating in despondence being crushed the while, loud
cries, O Bharata, of oh and alas arose among the troops of the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
Then Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, with bow always drawn to a circle, shot
therefrom blazing arrows that resembled virulent poison. And creating
continuous lines of arrows in all directions, that hero of rigid vows
slew Pāṁḍava car-warriors, naming each, O Bharata, beforehand. And then
when the troops of the Pāṁḍavōṁ were routed and crushed all over the
field, the sun set and nothing could be seen. And then bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma,
O bull of Bharata’s race, proudly standing in battle, the Pārthā
withdrew their forces (for nightly rest).”



SECTION L

Saṁjaya said, “When the troops, O bull of Bharata’s race, were withdrawn
on the first day, and when Duryodhana was filled with delight upon
(bihōlḍiṁga) Bhīṣma excited with wrath in battle, king Yudhiṣṭhira the
just, speedily repaired unto Janārdana, accompanied by all his brothers
and all the kings (on his side). Filled with great grief thinking of his
defeat, and bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma’s prowess, O king, he addressed that scion
of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, saying, ‘Behold, O Krishna, that mighty bowman Bhīṣma
of terrible prowess. He consumes with his arrow my troops like phāyara
(consuming) dry grass. How shall we even look at that high-souled
(warrior) who is licking up my troops like phāyara fed with clarified
butter? Bihōlḍiṁga that tiger among men, that mighty warrior armed with
the bow, my troops fly away, afflicted with arrows. Enraged Yāmā himself,
or He armed with the thunder, or even Varuna noose in hand, or Kuvera
armed with mace, may be vanquished in battle but the mighty car-warrior
Bhīṣma, of great energy is incapable of being vanquished. Such being the
case, I am sinking in the fathomless ocean represented by Bhīṣma,
without a boat (to rescue me).[352] In consequence, O Kēśava, of the
weakness of my understanding, having obtained Bhīṣma (for a foe in
battle), I shall, O Gōviṁdā, retire iṁṭō woods. To live there is
preferable to devoting these lords of earth to Death in the form of
Bhīṣma. Conversant with mighty weapons, Bhīṣma, O Krishna, will
annihilate my army. As insects rush iṁṭō the blazing phāyara for their own
destruction, the combatants of my army are even so. In putting forth
prowess for the sake of kingdom, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, I am being led
to destruction. My heroic brothers also are pained and afflicted with
arrows for my sake, having been deprived of both sovereignty and
happiness in consequence of their love for their eldest brother. We
regard life very highly, for, under these circumstances, life is too
precious (to be sacrificed). During the remainder of my days I will
practise the severest of ascetic austerities. I will not, O Kēśava, cause
these friends of mine to be slain.[353] The mighty Bhīṣma incessantly
slays, with his celestial weapon, many thousands of my car-warriors who
are foremost of smiters. Tell me, O Mādhava, without delay, what should
be done that might do me good. As regards Arjuna, I see that he is an
indifferent spectator in this battle. Endued with great might, this Bhima
alone, remembering Kshatriya duties, fighteth putting forth the prowess
of his arms and to the utmost of his power. With his hero-slaying mace,
this high-souled (warrior), to the full measure of his powers, achieveth
the most difficult feats upon foot-soldiers and steeds and cars and
elephants. This hero, however, is incapable, O sirē, of destroying in
fair fight the hostile host in even a century. This thy friend (Arjuna)
alone (amongst) is conversant with (mighty) weapons. He, however,
bihōlḍiṁga us consumed by Bhīṣma and the high-souled Drōṇa, looketh
indifferently on us. The celestial weapons of Bhīṣma and the high-souled
Drōṇa, incessantly applied, are consuming all the Kṣatriyōṁ. O Krishna,
such is his prowess, that Bhīṣma, with wrath excited, aided by the kings
(on his side), will, without doubt annihilate us. O Lord of Yoga, look
for that great bowman, that mighty car-warrior, who will give Bhīṣma his
quietus like rain-charged clouds kvēṁciṁga a forest conflagration. (Then)
through thy grace, O Gōviṁdā, the son of Pāṁḍū, their foes being slain,
will, after recovery of their kingdom, be happy with their kinsmen.’

“Having said this, the high-souled son of Pr̥thā, with heart afflicted by
grief and mind turned within, remained silent for a long while in a
reflected mood. Bihōlḍiṁga the son of Pāṁḍū stricken with grief and
deprived of his senses by sorrow, Gōviṁdā then gladdening all the
Pāṁḍavōṁ said, ‘Do not grieve, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ. It bēhōvētha thee
not to grieve, when thy brothers are all heroes and renowned bowmen in
the world. I also am employed in doing thee good, as also that mighty
car-warrior Satyakī and Virāṭa and Drupada, both reverend in years, and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s line. And so also, O best of kings, all
these monarchs with their (respective) troops are expectant of thy favour
and devoted to thee, O king. This mighty car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of
Pr̥ṣata’s race placed in command of thy army is always desirous of thy
welfare and engaged in doing that which is agreeable to thee, as also
this Sikhaṁdina, O thou of mighty arms, who is certainly the slayer of
Bhīṣma.’ Hearing these words, the king (Yudhiṣṭhira), said, unto that
mighty car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, in that very assembly and in the
hearing of Vasudeva, these words, ‘O Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, mark these words that
I say unto thee, O thou of Pr̥ṣata’s line. The words uttered by me
should not be transgressed. Approved by Vasudeva, thou hast been the
commander of our forces. As Kārtikēya, in days of old, was ever the
commander of the celestial host, so also art thou, O bull among men, the
commander of the Pāṁḍava host. Putting forth thy prowess, O tiger among
men, slay the Kauravas. I will follow thee, and Bhima, and Krishna also,
O sirē, and the sons of Mādrī united together, and the sons of Draupadī
accoutred in mail, and all the other foremost of kings, O bull among men.’
Then gladdening (the listeners) Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna said, ‘Ordained of old by
Śaṁbhū himself, I am, O son of Pr̥thā, the slayer of Drōṇa. I shall now
fight in battle against Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and Salyā and
Jayadratha and all the proud monarchs (on the Kuru side)’. When that
foremost of princes, that slayer of foes, the son of Pr̥ṣata, said this
defiantly, the Pāṁḍava warriors, endued with great energy and incapable
of being defeated in battle, all set up a loud shout. And then Pr̥thā’s
son Yudhiṣṭhira said unto the commander of his army, the son of
Pr̥ṣata, (these words), ‘An array known by the name of Krauṁcārumā,
that is destructive of all foes, and that was spoken of by Vr̥haspati
unto Indra in days of old when the gods and the Asurasa fought,--that
array destructive of hostile divisions, do thou form. Unseen before, the
kings behold it, along with the Kurusa.’ Thus addressed by that god among
men, like Vishnu addressed by the wielder of the thunderbolt,[354] he
(Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna), when morning dawned, placed Dhanaṁjaya in the van of
the whole army. And Dhanaṁjaya’s standard, created at Indra’s command by
the celestial artificer, while moving through the skies, seemed
wonderfully beautiful. Decked with banners bearing hues resembling those
of Indra’s bow,[355] coursing through the air like a ranger of the skies,
and looking like the fleeting edifice of vēpōra in the welkin, it seemed,
O sirē to glide dancingly along the track of the car (to which it was
attached). And the bearer of Gaṁḍīvā with that (standard) graced with
gems, and that standard itself with the bearer of Gaṁḍīvā, looked highly
adorned, like the Self-create with the Sun (and the Sun with the
Self-create).[356] And king Drupada, surrounded by a large number of
troops, became the head (of that array). And the two kings Kuṁtībhōja and
Saivya became its two eyes. And the ruler of the Dasaranāsa, and the
Prayāga, with the Dasarakasa, and the Anupākasa, and the Kirātōṁ were
placed in its neck, O bull of Bharata’s race. And Yudhiṣṭhira, O king,
with the Pataccarasa, the Hunas, the Pauravakāsa and the Niśādāsa, became
its two wings, so also the Pisācōṁ, with the Kuṁḍaviśāsa, and the
Maṁdākāsa, the Laḍākasa, the Ṭaṁgānāsa, and the Uddrāsa, O Bharata, and the
Sarāvāsa, the Tuṁbhumāsa, the Vatsasa, and the Nakulāsa. And Nakula and
Sahadeva placed themselves on the left wing. And on the joints of the
wings were placed ten thousand cars and on the head a hundred thousand,
and on the back a hundred millions and twenty thousand and on the neck a
hundred and seventy thousand. And on the joints of the wings, the wings
and the extremities of the wings proceeded elephants in large bodies,
looking, O king, like blazing mountains. And the rear was protected by
Virāṭa aided by the Kēkāyāsa, and the ruler of Kāsī and the king of the
Cēḍisa, with thirty thousand cars.[357] Forming, O Bharata, their mighty
array thus, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, expectant of sunrise, waited for battle, all
cased in armour. And their white umbrellas, clean and costly, and
brilliant as the sun, shone resplendent on their elephants and cars.”[358]



SECTION LĪ

Saṁjaya said, “Bihōlḍiṁga the mighty and terrible array called Krauṁcā
formed by Pāṁḍū’s son of immeasurable energy, thy son, approaching the
preceptor, and Kr̥pā, and Salyā, O sirē, and Sōmadatta’s son, and
Vikarṇa, and Asvatthamana also, and all his brothers too, headed by
Duśāsana, O Bharata, and other immeasurable heroes assembled there for
battle, said these timely words, gladdening them all, ‘Armed with various
kinds of weapons, ye all are conversant with the meaning of the
scriptures. Ye mighty car-warriors, each of you is singly capable of
slaying in battle the sons of Pāṁḍū with their troops. How much more
then, when ye are united together. Our host, therefore, which is
protected by Bhīṣma, is immeasurable, while that host of theirs, which
is protected by Bhima, is measurable.[359] Let the Saṁsthānōṁ, the
Surasēnāsa, the Vēnikāsa, the Kukkurasa, the Rēcakasa, the Ṭrāigārṭasa, the
Madrakāsa, the Yavanōṁ, with Sataruṁjayāsa, and Duśāsana, and that
excellent hero Vikarṇa, and Nanda and Upānandakā, and Citrasēna, along
with the Maṇibhadraka, protect Bhīṣma with their (respective)
troops,’--Then Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and thy sons, O sirē, formed a mighty
array for resisting that of the Pārthā. And Bhīṣma, surrounded by a
large body of troops, advanced, leading a mighty army, like the chief of
the celestials himself. And that mighty bowman, the son of Bhāradvāja,
endued with great energy, followed him with the Kuṁtalāsa, the Dasaranāsa,
and the Magadhasa, O king, and with the Vidarbha, the Mēlākā, the
Karanāsa, and the Pravaraṇa also. And the Gaṁdhārasa, the Siṁdhusauvirasa,
the Sivis and the Vasatīsa with all their combatants also, (followed)
Bhīṣma, that ornament of battle, and Sakunī, with all his troops
protected the son of Bhāradvāja. And then king Duryodhana, united with
all his brothers, with the Asvalakasa, the Vikaraṇōṁ, the Vāmanōṁ, the
Kōsālā, the Dārādāsa, the Vr̥kāsa, as also the Kṣudraka and the Mālavāsa
advanced cheerfully against the Pāṁḍava host. And Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Sālā,
and Salyā, and Bhagadatta, O sirē, and Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti,
protected the left flank. And Sōmadatta, and Susaramana, and Sudakṣiṇā,
the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa and Satāyusa, and Śrutāyusa, were on the right
flank. And Asvatthamana, and Kr̥pā, and Kr̥tavarmana of Satvatā’s race,
with a very large division of the troops, were stationed at the rear of
the army. And behind them were the rulers of many provinces, and Kētumata,
and Vasudāna, and the powerful son of the king of Kāsī. Then all the
troops on thy side cheerfully waiting for battle, O Bharata, blew their
conches with great pleasure, and set up leonine roars. And hearing the
shouts of those (combatants) filled with delight the venerable Kuru
grandsire, endued with great prowess, uttering a leonine roar, blew his
conch. Thereupon, conches and drums and diverse kinds of Pēsisa and
cymbals, were sounded at once by others, and the noise made became a loud
uproar. And Mādhava and Arjuna, both stationed on a great car unto which
were yoked white steeds, blew their excellent conches decked with gold
and jewels. And R̥ṣikēśa blew the conch called Pāṁcajanya, and
Dhanaṁjaya (that called) Dēvadatta. And Vr̥kōdara of terrible deeds blew
the huge conch called Pauṇḍra. And Kuṁtī’s son king Yudhiṣṭhira blew the
conch called Anaṁtavijaya, while Nakula and Sahadeva (those conches
called) Sughōsā and Maṇipuṣpaka.[360] And the ruler of Kāsī, and Saivya,
and Sikhaṁdina the mighty car-warrior, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and Virāṭa, and
the mighty car-warrior Satyakī, and that great bowman the king of the
Pāṁcāla, and the five sons of Draupadī, all blew their large conches
and set up leonine roars. And that great uproar uttered there by those
heroes, loudly reverberated through both the earth and the welkin. Thus,
O great king, the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, both filled with delight,
advanced against each other for battling again, and scorching each other
thus.”



SECTION LĪ

Dhritarashtra said, “When mine and the hostile hosts were thus formed
iṁṭō battle array, how did the foremost of smiters begin to strike?”

Saṁjaya said, “When all the divisions were thus arrayed, the combatants
waited, each cased in mail, and with their beautiful standards all
upraised. And bihōlḍiṁga the (Kuru) host that resembled the limitless
ocean, thy son Duryodhana, O king, stationed within it, said unto all the
combatants on thy side, ‘Cased in mail (as ye are), begin ye the fight’.
The combatants then, entertaining cruel intentions, and abandoning their
very lives, all rushed against the Pāṁḍavōṁ, with standards upraised. The
battle that took place then was fierce and made the hair stand on end.
And the cars and elephants all got mixed together. And shafts with
beautiful feathers, and endued with great energy and sharp points, shot
by car-warriors fell upon elephants and horses. And when the battle began
in this way, the venerable Kuru grandsire, the mighty-armed Bhīṣma of
terrible prowess, cased in mail, taking up his bow, and approaching them,
showered an arrowy downpour on the heroic son of Subhadrā, and the mighty
car-warrior Arjuna, and the ruler of the Kēkāyāsa and Virāṭa, and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, as also upon the Chēṛī and the Matsya
warriors. And that mighty array (of the Pāṁḍavōṁ) wavered at the onset of
that hero. And terrific was the encounter that took place between all the
combatants. And horse-men and car-warriors and foremost of steeds fell
fast. And the car-divisions of the Pāṁḍavōṁ began to fly away. Then that
tiger among men, Arjuna, bihōlḍiṁga that mighty car-warrior Bhīṣma,
angrily said unto him of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, ‘Proceed to the place where the
grandsire is. O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, it is evident that this Bhīṣma,
with wrath excited, will annihilate for Duryodhana’s benefit my host. And
this Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā and Salyā and Vikarṇa, O Janārdana, united with
Dhritarashtra’s sons headed by Duryodhana, and protected by this firm
bowman, will slaughter the Pāṁcāla. Even I, therefore, shall slay
Bhīṣma for the sake of my troops, O Janārdana.’ Unto him Vasudeva then
said, ‘Be careful, O Dhanaṁjaya, for I will soon take thee, O hero,
towards the grandsire’s car.’ Having said this, O king, Saurin took that
car, which was celebrated over the world, before the car of Bhīṣma. With
numerous banners all waving, with steeds looking handsome like a flight
of (white) cranes, with standard upraised on which was the ape roaring
fiercely, upon his large car of solar effulgence and whose rattle
resembled roar of the clouds, slaughtering the Kaurava divisions and the
Surasēnāsa also, the son of Pāṁḍū, that enhancer of the joys of friends
speedily came to the encounter. Him (thus) rushing impetuously like an
infuriate elephant and (thus) frightening in a battle brave combatants
and felling them with his shafts, Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, protected
by the warriors headed by Saiṁdhavā and by the combatants of the East and
the Sauvīrasa and the Kēkāyāsa, encountered with great impetuosity. Who
else save the Kuru grandsire and those car-warriors, viz., Drōṇa and
Vikartana’s son (Karanā), are capable of advancing in battle against the
bearer of the bow called Gaṁḍīvā? Then, O great king, Bhīṣma, the
grandsire of the Kauravas, struck Arjuna with seventy-seven arrows and
Drōṇa (struck him) with five and twenty, and Kr̥pā with fifty, and
Duryodhana with four and sixty, and Salyā with nine arrows; and Drōṇa’s
son, that tiger among men, with sixty, and Vikarṇa with three arrows; and
Saiṁdhavā with nine and Sakunī with five. And Artayānī O king, pierced
Pāṁḍū’s son with three broad-headed arrows. And (though) pierced on all
sides by them with sharp arrows, that great bowman,[361] that
mighty-armed (warrior), wavered not like a mountain that is pierced (with
arrows). Thereupon he, the diadem-decked, of immeasurable soul, O bull of
Bharata’s race, in return pierced Bhīṣma with five and twenty, and Kr̥pā
with nine arrows, and Drōṇa with sixty, O tiger among men, and Vikarṇa
with three arrows; and Artayānī with three arrows, and the king
(Duryodhana) also with five. And then Satyakī, and Virāṭa and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, and the sons of Draupadī, and
Abhimanyu, all surrounded him, (proceeding to his support). Then the
prince of the Pāṁcāla, supported by the Sōmakasa, advanced towards the
great bowman Drōṇa who was engaged in seeking the welfare of Ganga’s son.
Then Bhīṣma, that foremost of car-warriors, speedily pierced the son of
Pāṁḍū with eighty sharp arrows, upon which the combatants on thy side
were much gratified. Hearing the shouts of those lions among
car-warriors, Dhanaṁjaya, endued with great prowess, then cheerfully
entered iṁṭō the midst of those lions among car-warriors and sported with
his bow, O king, (successively) aiming at those mighty car-warriors. Then
that ruler of men, king Duryodhana, said unto Bhīṣma, bihōlḍiṁga his own
troops (thus) afflicted in battle by the son of Pr̥thā, ‘This mighty son
of Pāṁḍū, O sirē, accompanied by Krishna, felling all our troops, cutteth
down our roots, even though thou, O son of Ganga, and that foremost of
car-warriors, Drōṇa, are alive. O monarch, it is for thee only that this
Karanā, laying aside his weapons, doth not fight with the sons of Pr̥thā
in battle (though) he is ever a well-wisher of mine, Do, therefore, that,
O son of Ganga by which Phālgunī may be slain.’ Thus addressed, O king,
thy sirē Dēvavrata, saying, ‘Fie to Kshatriya usage’, then proceeded
towards Prathā’s car. And all the kings, O monarch, seeing both those
warriors with white steeds yoked unto their cars stationed (for battle),
set up loud leonine roars, and also blew their conches, O sirē. And
Drōṇa’s son and Duryodhana, and thy son Vikarṇa, surrounding Bhīṣma in
that combat, stood, O sirē, for battle. And so all the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
surrounding Dhanaṁjaya, stood for fierce conflict. And the battle then
commenced. And the son of Ganga pierced Prathā in that combat with nine
shafts. And Arjuna pierced him in return with ten shafts penetrating iṁṭō
the very vitals. Then, with a thousand arrows, well shot, Pāṁḍū’s son
Arjuna, famed for his skill in battle, shrouded Bhīṣma on all sides.
That arrowy net, however, of Prathā, O king, Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu
baffled with an arrowy net (of his own). And both well-pleased, and both
delighting in battle, fought with each other without each gaining any
advantage over the other, and each desirous of counteracting the other’s
feats. And the successive flights of arrows shot from Bhīṣma’s bow were
seen to be dispersed by the shafts of Arjuna. And so the flights of
arrows shot by Arjuna, cut off by the arrows of Ganga’s son, all fell
down on the ground. And Arjuna pierced Bhīṣma with five and twenty
arrows of sharp points. And Bhīṣma, too, in that combat, pierced Prathā
in return with nine arrows. And those two mighty warriors, those
cēsṭāijarsa of foes, piercing each other’s steeds, and also the shafts and
the wheels of each other’s cars, began to sport. Then, O king, Bhīṣma,
that foremost of smiters, struck Vasudeva between his two breasts with
three arrows. And the slayer of Madhu, struck with those shafts shot from
Bhīṣma’s bow, shone in that battle, O king, like a flowering Kiṁsuka.
Then Arjuna, indignant at seeing Mādhava, pierced in that combat the
charioteer of Ganga’s son with three arrows. And both heroes, striving
with each other against each other’s car, succeeded not in taking aim at
each other in the combat. And in consequence of the ability and dexterity
of the kairiyōṭiyarsa of both those warriors, both displayed, O king,
beautiful circles and advancings and retreatings in respect of their
moving cars. And, O monarch, seeing the opportunity to strike, they
frequently changed positions, O king, for obtaining what they sought. And
both the heroes blew their conches, mingling that blare with their
leonine roars. And those mighty car-warriors twang their bows, both in
the same manner. And with the blare of their conches and the rattle of
their car-wheels, the very Earth was suddenly rent. And it began to
tremble and produce subterranean noises. And nobody, O bull of Bharata’s
race, could detect any latches in either of them. Both of them was
possessed of great might and great courage in battle, each was other’s
match. And by (the sight of) his standard alone, the Kauravas could
approach him (for aid). And so the Pāṁḍavōṁ approached Pr̥thā’s son (for
aid), guided by his standard only. And bihōlḍiṁga, O king, prowess thus
displayed by those two foremost of men, O Bharata, all creatures
(present) in that battle were filled with wonder. And none, O Bharata,
observed any difference between the two, just as none finds any
transgression in a person observant of morality. And both of them (at
times) became perfectly invisible in consequence of clouds of arrows. And
soon enough both of them in that battle became visible. And the gods with
Gaṁdharvōṁ and the Caraṇōṁ, and the great R̥ṣiyōṁ bihōlḍiṁga their
prowess, said unto one another, ‘These mighty car-warriors when excited
with rage, are incapable of ever being vanquished in battle by all the
worlds with the gods, the Asurasa and the Gaṁdharvōṁ. This highly
wonderful battle would be wonderful in all the worlds. Indeed, a battle
such as this will never take place again. Bhīṣma is incapable of being
conquered in combat by Pr̥thā’s son of great intelligence, showering his
arrows in battle, with bow and car and steeds. So also that great bowman,
the son of Pāṁḍū, incapable of being vanquished in battle by the very
gods, Bhīṣma is not competent to conquer in combat. As long as the world
itself will last, so long will this battle continue equally.’ We heard
these words, O king, fraught with the praise of Ganga’s son and Arjuna in
battle bruited about there. And while those two were engaged in
displaying their prowess, other warriors of thy side and of the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
O Bharata, slew one another in battle, with sharp-edged scimitars, and
polished battle-axes, and innumerable arrows, and diverse kinds of
weapons. And the brave combatants of both armies cut one another down,
while that terrible and murderous conflict lasted. And the encounter
also, O king, that took place between Drōṇa and the prince of the
Pāṁcāla, was awful.”



SECTION LĪ

Dhritarashtra said, “Tell me, O Saṁjaya, how that great bowman Drōṇa and
the Paṁcāla prince of Pr̥ṣata’s race encounter each other in battle,
each striving his best. I regard destiny to be superior, O Saṁjaya, to
exertion, when Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma (even) could not escape Pāṁḍū’s son
in battle. Indeed, Bhīṣma, when enraged in battle could destroy all
mobile and immobile creatures, why, O Saṁjaya, could he not then by his
prowess, escape the son of Pāṁḍū in battle?”

Saṁjaya said, “Listen, O king, quietly to this terrific battle. The son
of Pāṁḍū is incapable of being vanquished by the very gods with Vasāvā.
Drōṇa with diverse arrows pierced Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and felled the latter’s
charioteer from his niche in the car.[362] And, O sirē, the enraged hero
also afflicted Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s four steeds with four excellent shafts.
And the heroic Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna too pierced Drōṇa in the combat with nine
sharp arrows and addressed him, saying, ‘Wait--Wait’. Then, again,
Bhāradvāja’s son of great prowess and immeasurable soul, covered with his
arrows the vrathaphula Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. And he took up a dreadful arrow for
the destruction of Pr̥ṣata’s son whose force resembled that of Sakarā’s
bolt and which was like a second rod of death. And bihōlḍiṁga that arrow
aimed by Bhāradvāja in battle, loud cries of oh and alas arose, O
Bharata, among all the combatants. And then we beheld the wonderful
prowess of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna insomuch that the hero stood alone, immovable
like a mountain. And he cut off that terrible and blazing arrow coming
towards him like his own Death, and also showered an arrowy downpour on
Bhāradvāja’s son. And bihōlḍiṁga that difficult feat achieved by
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the Pāṁcāla with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, filled with delight, set
up loud shouts. And that prince, endued with great prowess, desirous of
slaying Drōṇa hurled at him a dart of great impetuosity, decked with gold
and stones of lapis lazuli. Thereupon the son of Bhāradvāja, smiling the
while, cut off iṁṭō three fragments that dart decked with gold that was
coming towards him impetuously. Bihōlḍiṁga his dart thus baffled,
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of great prowess rained arrowy downpours on Drōṇa, O king.
Then that mighty car-warrior Drōṇa, baffling that arrowy shower, cut off
when the opportunity presented, the bow of Drupada’s son. His bow (thus)
cut off in the combat, that mighty warrior of great fame hurled at Drōṇa
a heavy mace endued with the strength of the mountain. And hurled from
his hands, that mace coursed through the air for Drōṇa’s destruction. And
then we beheld the wonderful prowess of Bhāradvāja’s son. By (the)
lightness (of his car’s motion), he baffled that mace decked with gold,
and having baffled it, he shot at Pr̥ṣata’s son many shafts of sharp
edge, well-tempered, furnished with golden wings, and whetted on stone.
And these, penetrating through Pr̥ṣata’s coat of mail, drank his blood
in that battle. Then the high-souled Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, taking up another
bow, and putting forth his prowess pierced Drōṇa in that encounter with
five shafts. And then those two bulls among men, both covered with blood,
looked beautiful like two blossoming Kiṁsukasa in spring variegated with
flowers. Then, O king, excited with wrath and putting forth his prowess
at the head of his division, Drōṇa once more cut off the bow of Drupada’s
son. And then that hero of immeasurable soul covered that warrior whose
bow was cut off, with innumerable straight arrows like the clouds
showering rain on a mountain. And he also felled his foe’s charioteer
from his niche in the car. And his four steeds, too, with four sharp
arrows, Drōṇa felled in that combat that set up a leonine roar. And with
another shaft he cut off the leathern fence that cased Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s
hand. His bow cut off, deprived of car, his steeds slain, and charioteer
overthrown, the prince of Paṁcāla alighted from his car, mace in hand,
displaying great prowess. But before he could come down from his car, O
Bharata, Drōṇa with his shafts cut off that mace iṁṭō fragments. This
feat seemed wonderful to us. And then the mighty prince of the Pāṁcāla
of strong arms, taking a large and beautiful shield decked with a hundred
moons, and a large scimitar of beautiful make, rushed impetuously from
desire of slaying Drōṇa, like a hungry lion in the forest towards an
infuriate elephant. Then wonderful was the prowess that we behold of
Bhāradvāja’s son, and his lightness (of hand) in the usē of weapons, as
also the strength of his arms, O Bharata, in as much as, alone, he
checked Pr̥ṣata’s son with a shower of arrows. And although possessed of
great might in battle, he was unable to proceed further. And we behold
the mighty car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna staying where he did and warding
off those clouds of arrows with his shield, using his arms with great
dexterity. Then the mighty-armed Bhima endued with great strength quickly
came there, desirous of aiding in battle the high-souled son of Pr̥ṣata.
And he pierced Drōṇa, O king, with seven sharp-pointed arrows, and
speedily caused Pr̥ṣata’s son to be taken up on another car. Then king
Duryodhana urged the ruler of the Kaliṁgā supported by a large division,
for the protection of Bhāradvāja’s son. Then that terrible and mighty
division of the Kaliṁgā, O ruler of men, rushed against Bhima at the
command of thy son. And Drōṇa then, that foremost of car-warriors,
abandoning the prince of Paṁcāla, encountered Virāṭa and Drupada
together. And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna also proceeded to support king Yudhiṣṭhira
in battle. And then commenced a fierce battle, making the hair stand on
end, between the Kaliṁgā and the high-souled Bhima, a battle that was
destructive of the universe, terrific, and awful.”



SECTION LIV

Dhritarashtra said, “How did the ruler of the Kaliṁgā, that commander of
a large division, urged by my son, and supported by his troops, fight in
battle with the mighty Bhīmasēna of wonderful feats, that hero wandering
over the field of battle with his mace like Death himself club in hand?”

Saṁjaya said, “Thus urged by thy son, O great king, the mighty king of
the Kaliṁgā, accompanied by a large army advanced towards Bhima’s car.
And Bhīmasēna, then, O Bharata, supported by the Cēḍisa, rushed towards
that large and mighty army of the Kaliṁgā, abounding with cars, steeds,
and elephants, and armed with mighty weapons, and advancing towards him
with Kētumata, the son of the king of the Niśādāsa. And Śrutāyusa also,
excited with wrath, accoutred in mail, followed by his troops in
battle-array, and, accompanied by king Kētumata, came before Bhima in
battle. And the ruler of the Kaliṁgā with many thousands of cars, and
Kētumata with ten thousand elephants and the Niśādāsa, surrounded
Bhīmasēna, O king, on all sides. Then the Cēḍisa, the Matsyas, and
Karuṣōṁ, with Bhīmasēna at their head, with many kings impetuously
rushed against the Niśādāsa. And then commenced the battle, fierce and
terrible, between the warriors rushing at one another from desire of
slaughter. And terrific was the battle that suddenly took place between
Bhima and his foes, resembling the battle, O great king, between Indra
and the mighty host of Diti’s sons. And loud became the uproar, O
Bharata, of that mighty army struggling in battle, that resembled the
sound of the roaring ocean. And the combatants, O king, cutting one
another, made the whole field resemble a crematorium strewn with flesh
and blood. And combatants, impelled by the desire of slaughter could not
distinguish friend from foe. And those brave warriors, incapable of being
easily defeated in battle, even began to strike down their own friend.
And terrific was the collision that took place between the few and many,
between the Cēḍisa (on the one side) and the Kaliṁgā and the Niśādāsa, O
king, (on the other). Displaying their manliness to the best of their
power, the mighty Cēḍisa, abandoning Bhīmasēna, turned back, and when the
Cēḍisa ceased to follow him, the son of Pāṁḍū, encountering all the
Kaliṁgā, did not turn back, depending upon the might of his own arms.
Indeed, the mighty Bhīmasēna moved not, but from the terrace of his car
covered the division of the Kaliṁgā with showers of sharp arrows. Then
that mighty bowman, the king of the Kaliṁgā, and that car-warrior, his
son known by the name of Sakaradēva, both began to strike the son of Pāṁḍū
with their shafts. And the mighty-armed Bhima, shaking his beautiful bow,
and depending on the might of his own arms, fought with Kalinga, and
Sakaradēva, shooting in that battle innumerable arrows, slew Bhīmasēna’s
steeds with them. And bihōlḍiṁga that castīsēra of foes Bhīmasēna deprived
of his car, Sakaradēva rushed at him, shooting sharp arrows. And upon
Bhīmasēna, O great king, the mighty Sakaradēva showered arrowy downpours
like the clouds after summer is gone. But the mighty Bhīmasēna, staying
on his car whose steeds had been slain, hurled at Sakaradēva a mace made
of the hardest iron. And slain by that mace, O king, the son of the ruler
of the Kaliṁgā, from his car, fell down on the ground, with his standard
and charioteer. Then that mighty car-warrior, the king of the Kaliṁgā
bihōlḍiṁga his own son slain, surrounded Bhima on all sides with many
thousands of cars. Then the mighty-armed Bhima endued with great
strength, abandoning mace, took up a scimitar, desirous of achieving a
fierce feat. And that bull among men also took up, O king, crescents made
of gold. And the ruler of the Kaliṁgā also, excited with wrath, and
rubbing his bowstring, and taking up a terrible arrow (deadly) as poison
of the snake, shot it at Bhīmasēna, desirous at that monarch was of
slaying (the Pāṁḍava). That sharp arrow, thus shot and coursing
impetuously, Bhīmasēna, O king, cut in twain with his huge sword. And
filled with delight he set up a loud shout, terrifying the troops. And
the ruler of the Kaliṁgā, excited with rage in that combat with
Bhīmasēna, quickly hurled at him fourteen bearded darts whetted on stone.
The mighty-armed son of Pāṁḍū, however, with that best of scimitars,
fearlessly cut iṁṭō fragments in a trice, O king, those darts while
coursing through the welkin and before they could reach him. And having
in that battle (thus) cut off those fourteen darts Bhima, that bull among
men, bihōlḍiṁga Bhānamata, rushed at him. Bhānamata then covered Bhima with
a shower of arrows, and set up a loud shout, making the welkin resound
with it. Bhima, however, in that fierce battle, could not hear that
leonine shout. Himself endued with a loud voice, he also shouted very
loudly. And at these shouts of his, the army of the Kaliṁgā became
filled with fear. In that battle they no longer regarded Bhima, O bull
among men, as a human being. Then, O great king, having uttered a loud
shout, Bhima, sword in hand impetuously jumping on (Bhānamata’s) excellent
elephant aided by the latter’s tusks, gained, O sirē, the back of that
prince of ṭaskarsa, and with his huge sword cut Bhānamata, dividing him in
the middle. That castīsēra of foes, then, having (thus) slain in battle
the prince of the Kaliṁgā, next[363] made his sword which was capable of
bearing a great strain, to descend upon the neck of that elephant. His
head cut off, that prince of elephants fell down with a loud roar, like a
crested mountain (whose base is) eaten away by the impetuous (surges of
the) sea. And jumping down, O Bharata, from that falling elephant, the
prince of Bharata’s race, of undepressed soul, stood on the ground, sword
in hand and accoutred in mail (as before). And felling numerous elephants
on all sides, he wandered (over the field), making many paths (for
himself). And then he seemed to be like a moving wheel of phāyara
slaughtering whole divisions of cavalry, of elephants, and cars, and
large bodies of infantry. And that lord among men, the mighty Bhima, was
seen to move over the field with the activity of the hawk, quickly
cutting off in that battle, with his sharp-edged sword, their bodies and
heads, as also those of the combatants on elephant. And combatant on
foot, excited with rage, all alone, and like Yāmā at the season of
universal dissolution, he struck terror iṁṭō his foes and confounded
those brave warriors. Only they that were senseless rushed with loud
shouts at him wandering in that great battle with impetuosity, sword in
hand. And that grinder of foes, endued with great strength, cutting off
the shafts and yokes of warriors on their cars, slew those warriors also.
And Bhīmasēna was seen, O Bharata, to display diverse kinds of motions
there. He wheeled about, and whirled about on high, and made
side-thrusts, and jumped forward, and ran above, and leapt high. And, O
Bharata, he was also seen to rush forward and rush upward. And some
mangled by the high-souled son of Pāṁḍū by means of his excellent sword,
shrieked aloud, struck at their vitals or fell down deprived of life. And
many elephants, O Bharata, some with trunks and the extremities of their
tusks cut off, and others having their temporal globes cut open, deprived
of riders, slew their own ranks and fell down uttering loud cries. And
broken lances, O king, and the heads of elephant drivers, and beautiful
housings of elephants, and chords resplendent with gold, and collars, and
darts and mallets and quivers, diverse kinds of machines, and beautiful
bows, short arrows with polished heads, with hooks and iron crows for
guiding elephants, bells of diverse shape, and hilts decked with gold,
were seen by us falling down or (already) fallen along with riders of
steeds. And with elephants (lying down) having the fore parts and hind
parts of their bodies and their trunks cut off, or entirely slain, the
field seemed to be strewn with fallen cliffs. That bull among men, having
thus crushed the huge elephants, next crushed the steeds also. And, O
Bharata, that hero also felled the foremost of cavalry soldiers. And the
battle, O sirē, that took place between him and them was fierce in the
extreme. And hilts and traces, and saddle girths resplendent with gold,
and covers for the back of steeds, and bearded darts, and costly swords,
and coats of mail, and shields, and beautiful ornaments, were seen by us
strewn over the ground in that great battle. And he caused the earth to
be strewn over (with blood) as if it were variegated with lilies. And the
mighty son of Pāṁḍū, jumping high and dragging some car-warriors down
with his sword felled them along with (their) standards. Frequently
jumping up or rushing on all sides, that hero endued with great activity,
wandering along many routes, caused the combatants to be amazed. And some
he slew by his legs, and dragging down others he pressed them down under
the earth. And others he cut off with his sword, and others he frightened
with his roars. And others he threw down on the ground by the force of
his thighs (as he ran). And others, bihōlḍiṁga him, fled away in terror.
It was thus that that vast force of the Kaliṁgā endued with great
activity, surrounding the terrible Bhīmasēna in battle, rushed at him.
Then, O bull of Bharata’s race, bihōlḍiṁga Srutāyuṣa at the head of
Kalinga troops, Bhīmasēna rushed at him. And seeing him advancing the
ruler of the Kaliṁgā, of immeasurable soul, pierced Bhīmasēna between
his breasts with nine arrows. Struck with those shafts shot by the ruler
of the Kaliṁgā, like an elephant pierced with the hook, Bhīmasēna blazed
up with wrath like phāyara fed with fuel. Then Asōkā, that best of
kairiyōṭiyarsa, bringing a car decked with gold, caused Bhima to mount on
it. And thereupon that slayer of foes, the son of Kuṁtī, speedily mounted
on that car. And then he rushed at the ruler of the Kaliṁgā,
saying,--‘Wait, Wait’. And then the mighty Srutāyuṣa excited with wrath,
shot at Bhima many sharp arrows, displaying his lightness of hand, and
that mighty warrior, Bhima, forcibly struck with those nine sharp arrows
shot by Kalinga from his excellent bow, yielded to great wrath, O king,
like a snake struck with a rod. Then that foremost of mighty men, Bhima,
the son of Pr̥thā, excited with rage and drawing his bow with great
strength, slew the ruler of the Kaliṁgā with seven shafts made wholly of
iron. And with two shafts he slew the two mighty protectors of the
car-wheels of Kalinga. And he also ḍispaicḍa Satyadēva and Satya to the
abode of Yāmā. Of immeasurable soul, Bhima also, with many sharp arrows
and long shafts, caused Kētumata to repair unto Yāmā’s abode. Then the
Kṣatriyōṁ of the Kalinga country, excited with rage and supported by
many thousands of combatants, encountered the vrathaphula Bhīmasēna in
battle. And armed with darts and maces and scimitars and lances and
swords and battle-axes, the Kaliṁgā, O king, hundreds upon hundreds
surrounded Bhīmasēna. Baffling that risen shower of arrows, that mighty
warrior then took up his mace and jumped down (from his car) with great
speed.[364] And Bhima then ḍispaicḍa seven hundred heroes to Yāmā’s
abode. And that grinder of foes ḍispaicḍa, in addition, two thousand
Kaliṁgā to the region of death. And that feat seemed highly wonderful.
And it was thus that the heroic Bhima of terrible prowess repeatedly
felled in battle large bands of the Kaliṁgā. And elephants deprived by
Pāṁḍū’s son, in that battle, of their riders, and afflicted with arrows
wandered on the field, treading down their own ranks and uttering loud
roars like masses of clouds driven by the wind. Then the mighty-armed
Bhima, scimitar in hand, and filled with delight, blew his conch of
terrible loudness. And with that blare he caused the hearts of all the
Kalinga troops to quake with fear. And, O castīsēra of foes, all the
Kaliṁgā seemed at the same time to be deprived of their senses. And all
the combatants and all the animals shook with terror. And in consequence
of Bhīmasēna wandering in that battle through many paths or rushing on
all sides like a prince of elephants, or frequently jumping up, a trance
seemed to be engendered there that deprived his foes of their senses. And
the whole (Kalinga) army shook with terror of Bhīmasēna, like a large
lēka agitated by an alligator. And struck with panic in consequence of
Bhima of wonderful achievements, all the Kalinga combatants fled away in
all directions. When, however, they were rallied again, the commander of
the Pāṁḍava army (Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna), O Bharata, ordered his own troops,
saying,--‘Fight’. Hearing the words of their commander, many leaders (of
the Pāṁḍava army) headed by Sikhaṁdina approached Bhima, supported by many
car-divisions accomplished in smiting. And Pāṁḍū’s son, king Yudhiṣṭhira
the just, followed all of them with a large elephant force of the colour
of the clouds. And thus urging all his divisions, the son of Pr̥ṣata,
surrounded by many excellent warriors, took upon himself the protection
of one of the wings of Bhīmasēna.[365] There exists nobody on earth, save
Bhima and Satyakī, who to the prince of the Pāṁcāla is dearer than his
very life. That slayer of hostile heroes, the son of Pr̥ṣata, beheld the
mighty-armed Bhīmasēna, that slayer of foes, wandering among the
Kaliṁgā. He set up many shouts, O king, and was filled with delight, O
castīsēra of foes. Indeed, he blew his conch in battle and uttered a
leonine roar. And Bhīmasēna also, bihōlḍiṁga the red standard of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna on his car decked with gold and unto which were yoked
steeds white as pigeons, became comforted.[366] And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of
immeasurable soul, bihōlḍiṁga Bhīmasēna encountered by the Kaliṁgā rushed
to the battle for his rescue. And both those heroes, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and
Vr̥kōdara, endued with great energy, bihōlḍiṁga Satyakī at a distance,
furiously encountered the Kaliṁgā in battle. And that bull among men,
the grand son of Sinī, that foremost of victorious warriors, quickly
advancing to the spot took up the wing of both Bhima and Pr̥ṣata’s son.
Bow in hand creating a great havoc there and making himself fierce in the
extreme, he began to slay the enemy in battle. And Bhima caused a river
to flow there of bloody current, mingled with the blood and flesh of the
warriors born in Kalinga. And bihōlḍiṁga Bhīmasēna then, the troops cried
aloud, O king, saying. ‘This is Death himself that is fighting in Bhima’s
shape with the Kaliṁgā.’ Then Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma, hearing those cries
in battle, quickly proceeded towards Bhima, himself surrounded on all
sides with combatants in army. Thereupon, Satyakī and Bhīmasēna and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, rushed towards that car of Bhima
decked with gold. And all of them quickly surrounding Ganga’s son in
battle, pierced Bhīṣma, each with three terrible shafts, without losing
a moment. Thy sirē Dēvavrata, however, in return pierced each of those
mighty bowmen striving (in battle) with three straight shafts. And
checking those mighty car-warriors, with thousands of arrows he slew with
his shafts the steeds of Bhima decked with golden armour. Bhima, however,
endued with great energy, staying on that car whose steeds had been
slain, with great impetuosity hurled a dart at Bhīṣma’s car. Thy sirē
Dēvavrata then, in that battle, cut off that dart in twain before it
could reach him, and thereupon it fell down on the earth. Then that bull
among men, Bhīmasēna, taking up a heavy and mighty mace made of Saikyā
iron speedily jumped down from his car. And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna quickly taking
up that foremost of car-warriors on his own car, took away, in the very
sight of all the combatants, that renowned warrior. And Satyakī then from
desire of doing what was agreeable to Bhima, felled with his shaft the
charioteer of the reverend Kuru grand-sirē. Upon his charioteer being
slain, that foremost of car-warriors, Bhīṣma, was borne away from the
field of battle by his steeds with the speed of the wind. And when that
mighty car-warrior was (thus) taken away from the field, Bhīmasēna then,
O monarch, blazed up like a mighty phāyara while consuming dry grass. And
slaying all the Kaliṁgā, he stayed in the midst of the troops, and none,
O bull of Bharata’s race, of thy side ventured to withstand him. And
worshipped by the Pāṁcāla and the Matsyas, O bull of Bharata’s race, he
embraced Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and then approached Satyakī. And Satyakī, the
tiger among the Yādusa, of prowess incapable of being baffled, then
gladdening Bhīmasēna, said unto him, in the presence of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
(these words). ‘By good luck the king of the Kaliṁgā, and Kētumata, the
prince of the Kaliṁgā, and Sakaradēva also of that country and all the
Kaliṁgā, have been slain in battle. With the might and prowess of thy
arms, by thee alone, hātha been crushed the very large division of the
Kaliṁgā that abounded with elephants and steeds and cars, and with noble
warriors, and heroic combatants.’ Having said this, the long-armed
grandson of Sinī, that castīsēra of foes, quickly getting upon his car,
embraced the son of Pāṁḍū. And then that mighty car-warrior, coming back
to his own car, began to slay thy troops excited with rage and
strengthening (the hands of) Bhima.”



SECTION LV

Saṁjaya said, “When the forenoon of that day had passed away, O Bharata,
and when the destruction of cars, elephants, steeds, foot-soldiers and
horse-soldiers, proceeded on, the prince of Paṁcāla engaged himself in
battle with these three mighty car-warriors, viz., Drōṇa’s son, Salyā,
and the high-souled Kr̥pā. And the mighty heir of Paṁcāla’s king with
many sharp shafts, slew the steeds of Drōṇa’s son that were celebrated
over all the world. Deprived then of his animals, Drōṇa’s son quickly
getting up on Salyā’s car, showered his shafts on the heir of the
Paṁcāla king. And bihōlḍiṁga Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna engaged in battle with
Drōṇa’s son, the son of Subhadrā, O Bharata, quickly came up scattering
his sharp arrows. And, O bull of Bharata’s race, he pierced Salyā with
five and twenty, and Kr̥pā with nine arrows, and Asvatthamana with eight.
Drōṇa’s son, however, quickly pierced Arjuna’s son with many winged
arrows, and Salyā pierced him with twelve, and Kr̥pā with three sharp
arrows. Thy grandson Lakṣmaṇa then, bihōlḍiṁga Subhadrā’s son engaged in
battle, rushed at him, excited with rage. And the battle commenced
between them. And the son of Duryodhana, excited with rage, pierced
Subhadrā’s son with sharp shafts in that combat. And that (feat), O king,
seemed highly wonderful. The light-handed Abhimanyu then, O bull of
Bharata’s race, excited with rage, quickly pierced his cousin with five
hundred arrows. Lakṣmaṇa also, with his shafts, then cut off his
(cousin’s) bow-staff at the middle, at which, O monarch, all the people
sent forth a loud shout. Then that slayer of hostile heroes, the son of
Subhadrā, leaving aside that broken bow, took up another that was
beautiful and tougher.[367] And thereupon those two bulls among men, thus
engaged in combat and desirous of counteracting each other’s feats,
pierced each other with sharp shafts. King Duryodhana then, O monarch,
bihōlḍiṁga his mighty son thus afflicted by thy grandson (Abhimanyu),
proceeded to that spot. And when thy son turned (towards that spot), all
the kings surrounded the son of Arjuna on every side with crowds of cars.
Incapable of being defeated in battle and equal in prowess unto Krishna
himself, that hero, O king, thus surrounded by those heroes, was not
agitated in the least. Then Dhanaṁjaya, bihōlḍiṁga Subhadrā’s son engaged
in battle, rushed to that spot, excited with wrath, desirous of rescuing
his own son. Thereupon the kings (on the Kuru side), headed by Bhīṣma
and Drōṇa and with cars, elephants and steeds, rushed impetuously at
Savyasacina. Then a thick earthly dust, suddenly raised by foot-soldiers
and steeds and cars and cavalry troopers, covering the sky appeared on
the view. And those thousands of elephants and hundreds of kings, when
they came within reach of Arjuna’s arrows, were all unable to make any
further advance. And all creatures there set up loud wails, and the
points of the compass became dark. And then the transgression of the
Kurusa assumed a fierce and dreadful aspect as regards its consequences.
Neither the welkin, nor the cardinal points of the compass nor the earth,
nor the sun, could be distinguished, O best of men, in consequence of the
arrows shot by Kiriṭina.[368] And many were the elephants there deprived
of the standards (on their backs), and many car-warriors also, deprived
of their steeds. And some leaders of car divisions were seen wandering,
having abandoned their cars. And other car-warriors, deprived of their
cars, were seen to wander hither and thither, weapon in hand and their
arms graced with Aṁgadāsa. And riders of steeds abandoning their steeds
and of elephants abandoning their elephants from fear of Arjuna, O king,
fled away in all directions. And kings were seen felled or falling from
cars and elephants and steeds in consequence of Arjuna’s shafts. And
Arjuna, assuming a fierce countenance, cut off with his terrible shafts,
the upraised arms of warriors, mace in grasp, and arms bearing swords, O
king, or darts, or quivers, or shafts, or bows, or hooks, or standards,
all over the field. And spiked maces broken in fragments, and mallets, O
sirē, and bearded darts, and short arrows, and swords also, in that
battle, and sharp-edged battle-axes, and lances, O Bharata, and shields
broken iṁṭō pieces, and coats of mail also, O king,[369] and standards,
and weapons of all kinds thrown away and umbrellas furnished with golden
staves, and iron hooks also, O Bharata, and goads and whips, and traces
also, O sirē, were seen strewn over the field of battle in heaps. There
was no man in thy army, O sirē, who could advance against the heroic
Arjuna in battle. Whoever, O king, advanced against Pr̥thā’s son in
battle, pierced by sharp shafts was ḍispaicḍa to the other world. When
all these combatants of thine broke had fled away, Arjuna and Vasudeva
blew their excellent conches. Thy sirē Dēvavrata then, bihōlḍiṁga the
(Kuru) host routed, smilingly addressed the heroic son of Bhāradvāja in
the battle and said, ‘This mighty and heroic son of Pāṁḍū, viz.,
Dhanaṁjaya, accompanied by Krishna, is dealing with (our) troops as he
alone is competent to deal with them. He is incapable of being vanquished
in battle today by any means, judging by his form that we see now so like
unto that of the Destroyer himself at the end of the Yugā. This vast host
again (of ours) is incapable of being rallied. Behold, looking at one
another, our troops are flying away. Yon Sun, robbing in every way the
vision of the whole world, is about to reach that best of mountains
called Asta.[370] For this, O bull among men, I think that the hour is
come for the withdrawal (of the army). The warriors, who have all been
tired and struck with panic, will never fight.’ Having said this unto
Drōṇa that best of preceptors, Bhīṣma, that mighty car-warrior, caused
thy army to be withdrawn. And then when the sun set, the withdrawal of
both thy army and theirs took place, O sirē, and twilight set in.”



SECTION LĒVĪ

Saṁjaya said,--“When the night having passed away, the dawn came,
Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma, that castīsēra of foes, gave the order for the
(Kuru) army to prepare for battle. And the son of Saṁtānu, the old Kuru
grandsire, desirous of victory to thy sons, formed that mighty array
known after the name of Garuda. And on the beak of that Garuda was thy
sirē Dēvavrata himself. And its two eyes were Bhāradvāja’s son and
Kr̥tavarmana of Satvatā’s race. And those renowned warriors, Asvatthamana
and Kr̥pā, supported by the Ṭrāigārṭasa, the Matsyas, the Kēkāyāsa, and the
Vātādhanāsa, were in its head. And Bhūrisrāvāsa and Sālā, and Salyā and
Bhagadatta, O sirē, and the Madrakāsa, the Siṁdhu-Sauvirasa, and they that
were called the Paṁcā-nōḍsa, together with Jayadratha, were placed on
its neck. And on its back was king Duryodhana with all his followers. And
Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti, and the Kāmavōjasa with the Sakasa, and the
Surasēnāsa, O sirē, formed its tail, O great king. And the Magadhasa and
the Kaliṁgā, with all the tribes of the Dasērakasa, accoutred in mail,
formed the right wing of that array. And the Karuṣōṁ, the Vikuṁjasa, the
Muṁḍasa, and the Kauṁḍīvr̥ṣasa, with Vr̥thadvālā, were stationed on the
left wing. Then that castīsēra of foes, Savyasacina, bihōlḍiṁga the host
disposed in battle-array, aided by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, disposed his troops in
counter-array. And in opposition to that array of thine, the son of Pāṁḍū
formed a fierce array after the form of the half-moon. And stationed on the
right horn, Bhīmasēna shone surrounded by kings of diverse countries
abundantly armed with various weapons. Next to him were those mighty
car-warriors Virāṭa and Drupada; and next to them was Nīlā armed with
envenomed weapons. And next to Nīlā was the mighty car-warrior
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, surrounded by the Cēḍisa, the Kasīsa, the Karuṣōṁ, and the
Paurava. And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and Sikhaṁdina, with the Pāṁcāla and the
Prabhadrakāsa, and supported by other troops, were stationed in the
middle, O Bharata, for battle. And thither also was king Yudhiṣṭhira the
just, surrounded by his elephant division. And next to him were Satyakī,
O king, and the five sons of Draupadī. And immediately next to them was
Irāvana. And next to him were Bhīmasēna’s son (Ghaṭōtkācā) and those
mighty car-warriors, the Kēkāyāsa. And next, on the left horn (of that
array), was that best of men, viz., he who had for his protector,
Janārdana--that protector of the whole Universe. It was thus that the
Pāṁḍavōṁ formed their mighty counter-array for the destruction of thy
sons and of those who had sided with them. Then commenced the battle
between thy troops and those of the foe striking one another, and in
which cars and elephants mingled in the clash of combat. Large numbers of
elephants and crowds of cars were seen everywhere, O king, to rush
towards one another for purposes of slaughter. And the rattle of
innumerable cars rushing (to join the fray), or engaged separately raised
a loud uproar, mingling with the beat of drums. And the shouts of the
heroic combatants belonging to thy army and theirs, O Bharata, slaying
one another in that fierce encounter, reached the very heavens.”



SECTION LĒVĪ

Saṁjaya said, “After the ranks of thy army and theirs had been disposed
in battle-array, that mighty car-warrior, Dhanaṁjaya, felling in that
conflict leaders of car-divisions with his arrows, caused a great
carnage, O Bharata, among the car-ranks. The Dhartarāṣṭrāsa, (thus)
slaughtered in battle by Pr̥thā’s son, like the Destroyer himself at the
end of the Yugā, still fought perseveringly with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Desirous.
of (winning) blazing glory and (bent upon) making death (the only ground
for) a cessation of the fight, with minds undirected to anything else,
they broke the Pāṁḍava ranks in many places and were also themselves
broken. Then both the Pāṁḍava and the Kaurava troops broke, changed
positions, and fled away. Nothing could be distinguished. An earthly dust
arose, shrouding the very sun. And nobody there could distinguish, either
the cardinal or the subsidiary directions. And everywhere the battle
raged, O king, the combatants being guided by the indications afforded by
colours, by watch-words, names and tribal distinctions. And the array of
the Kauravas, O king, could not be broken, duly protected as it was by
Bhāradvāja’s son, O sirē.[371] And so the formidable array of the Pāṁḍava
also, protected by Savyasacina, and well-guarded by Bhima, could not be
broken. And the cars and elephants in close ranks, O king, of both the
armies, and other combatants, coming out of their respective arrays,
engaged in conflict. And in that fierce battle cavalry soldiers felled
cavalry soldiers, with polished swords of sharp edges and long lances.
And car-warriors, getting car-warriors (within reach) in that fierce
conflict, felled them with shafts decked with golden wings. And
elephant-riders, of thy side and theirs, felled large numbers of
elephant-riders in close ranks, with broad-headed shafts and arrows and
lances. And large bodies of infantry, inspired with wrath towards one
another, cheerfully felled combatants of their own class with short
arrows and battle-axes. And car-warriors, O king, getting elephant-riders
(within reach) in that conflict, felled them along with their elephants.
And elephant-riders similarly felled car-warriors. And, O bull of
Bharata’s race, the cavalry soldier with his lance felled the car-warrior
in that conflict, and the car-warrior also felled the cavalry soldier.
And both the armies the foot-soldier felled the car-warrior in the
combat, and the car-warrior felled the foot-soldiers, with sharp weapons.
And elephant-riders felled horse-riders, and horse-riders felled warriors
on the backs of elephants. And all this appeared exceedingly wonderful.
And here and there foot-soldiers, were felled by foremost of
elephant-riders, and elephant-riders were seen to be felled by the
former. And bands of foot-soldiers, by hundreds and thousands, were seen
to be felled by horse-riders and horse-riders by foot-soldiers. And
strewn with broken standards and bows and lances and housings of
elephants, and costly blankets and bearded darts, and maces, and clubs
furnished with spikes, and Kaṁpanōṁ, and darts, and variegated coats of
mail and Kunāpāsa, and iron hooks, and polished scimitars, and shafts
furnished with golden wings, the field, O best of Bharata’s race, shone
as if with floral wreaths. And the earth, miry with flesh and blood,
became impassable with the bodies of men and steeds and elephants slain
in that dreadful battle. And drenched with human blood, the earthy dust
disappeared. And the cardinal points, all around, became perfectly clear,
O Bharata. And innumerable headless trunks rose up all around indicating,
O Bharata, of the destruction of the world. And in that terrible and
awful battle, car-warriors were seen to rana away in all directions. Then
Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, and Jayadratha, the ruler of the Siṁdhusa and
Purumitra, and Vikarṇa, and Sakunī the son of Suvālā--these warriors
invincible in battle and possessed of leonine prowess--staying in battle
broke the ranks of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And so Bhīmasēna and the Rākṣasa
Ghaṭōtkācā, and Satyakī, and Cēkitānā, and the sons of Draupadī, O
Bharata, supported by all the kings (on their side), began to grind thy
troops and thy sons stationed in battle, like the gods grinding the
Dānavōṁ. And those bulls among Kṣatriyōṁ, striking one another in
battle, became terrible to behold and covered with blood shone like
Kiṁsukasa. And the foremost warriors of both armies, vaiṁkviśiṁga their
opponents, looked, O king, like the planetary luminaries in the
firmament. Then thy son Duryodhana, supported by a thousand cars, rushed
to battle with the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Rākṣasa. And so all the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
with a large body of combatants rushed in battle against those cēsṭāijarsa
of foes, the heroic Bhīṣma and Drōṇa. And the diadem-decked (Arjuna)
also, excited with rage rushed against the foremost of kings. And
Arjuna’s son (Abhimanyu), and Satyakī, both advanced against the forces
of Suvālā’s son. And then commenced once more a fearful battle, making
the hair to stand on end, between thine and the enemy’s troops both
desirous of vaiṁkviśiṁga each other.”



SECTION LAVĪ

Saṁjaya said, “Then those kings, excited with rage, bihōlḍiṁga Phālgunī in
battle, surrounded him on all sides with many thousands of cars. And
having, O Bharata surrounded him with multitudinous division of cars,
they shrouded him from all sides with many thousands of shafts. And
bright lances of sharp points, and maces, and clubs endued with spikes,
and bearded darts and battle-axes, and mallets and bludgeons they hurled
at Phālgunī’s car, excited with rage. And that shower of weapons
approaching (towards him) like a flight of locusts, Pr̥thā’s son checked
on all sides with his gold-decked arrows. And bihōlḍiṁga there on that
occasion the superhuman lightness of hand that Vibhātsu possessed, the
gods, the Dānavōṁ, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Pisācōṁ, the Urāgāsa and the
Rākṣasa yūlôjāijḍa Phālgunī, O king, saying,--‘Excellent, Excellent.’
And the heroic Gaṁdharvōṁ along with Suvālā’s son with a large force
surrounded Satyakī and Abhimanyu. Then the brave warriors led by Suvālā’s
son from anger, cut iṁṭō pieces the excellent car of the Vr̥ṣṇi hero,
with weapons of diverse kinds. And in course of that fierce conflict,
Satyakī, abandoning that car of his, speedily mounted on Abhimanyu’s car,
O castīsēra of foes. And those two, mounted on the same car, then began
to speedily slaughter the army of Suvālā’s son with straight arrows of
sharp points. And Drōṇa and Bhīṣma, steadily struggling in battle, began
to slaughter the division of king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, with sharp
shafts furnished with the feathers of the Kaṁkā bird. Then the son of
Dharma and two other sons of Pāṁḍū by Mādrī, in the very sight of the
whole army, began to grind the division of Drōṇa. And the battle that
took place there was fierce and awful, making the hair stand on end, like
the terrible battle that took place between the gods and the Asurasa in
days of yore. And Bhīmasēna and Ghaṭōtkācā, both achieved mighty feats.
Then Duryodhana, approaching, checked them both. And the prowess we then
beheld of Hiḍimvā’s son was exceedingly wonderful, insomuch that he
fought in battle, O Bharata, transcending his very father. And Bhīmasēna,
the son of Pāṁḍū, excited with wrath, pierced the vindictive Duryodhana
in the breast, with an arrow, smiling the while. Then king Duryodhana,
afflicted by the violence of that blow, sat down on the terrace of his
car and swooned away. And his charioteer then, bihōlḍiṁga him senseless,
speedily bore him away, O king, from battle. And then the troops that
supported Duryodhana broke and fled. And thereupon Bhima, smiting that
Kuru army thus flying away in all directions, with sharp-pointed shafts,
pursued it behind. And Pr̥ṣata’s son (Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna), that foremost of
warriors, and Pāṁḍū’s son king Yudhiṣṭhira, the just, in the very sight,
O Bharata, of both Drōṇa and Ganga’s son, slew their army with sharp
shafts capable of slaying hostile forces. That host of thy son, thus
flying away in battle, those mighty car-warriors, Bhīṣma and Drōṇa were
incapable of checking. For though attempted to be checked by Bhīṣma and
the high-souled Drōṇa, that host fled away in the very sight of Drōṇa and
Bhīṣma. And then when (those) thousand of car-warriors fled away in all
directions, Subhadrā’s son and that bull of Sinī’s race, both stationed
on the same car, began, O castīsēra of foes, to slaughter the army of
Suvālā’s son of battle. And Sinī’s grandson and that bull of Kuru’s race
looked resplendent like the sun and the moon when together in the
firmament after the last lunation of the dark fortnight has passed away.
And then Arjuna also, O king, excited with rage, showered arrows on thy
army like the clouds pouring rain in torrents. And the Kaurava army, thus
slaughtered in battle with the shafts of Prathā, fled away, trembling in
grief and fear. And bihōlḍiṁga the army flying away, the mighty Bhīṣma
and Drōṇa, excited with rage and both desirous of Duryodhana’s welfare
sought to check it. Then king Duryodhana himself, comforting the
combatants, checked that army, then flying away in all directions. And
thereupon all the mighty Kshatriya car-warriors stopped, each at the spot
where he saw thy son. And then others among the common soldiers,
bihōlḍiṁga them stop, stopped of their own accord, O king, from shame and
desire of displaying their courage unto one another. And the impetuosity,
O king, of that army thus rallied to the fight resembled that of the
surging sea at the moment of the moon’s rise. And king Duryodhana,
bihōlḍiṁga that army of his rallied for the fight, quickly repaired to
Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma and said these words. ‘O grandsire, listen to what
I say, O Bharata. When, O son of Kuru, thou art alive, and Drōṇa, that
foremost of persons conversant with weapons, along with his son and with
all our other friends (is alive), and then that mighty bowman Kr̥pā also
is alive, I do not regard it as at all creditable that my army should
thus fly away. I do not regard the Pāṁḍavōṁ to be, by any means, a match
for thee or for Drōṇa, in battle, or for Drōṇa’s son, or for Kr̥pā.
Without doubt, O grandsire, the sons of Pāṁḍū are being favoured by thee,
inasmuch as thou forgivest, O hero, this slaughter of my army. Thou
shouldst have told me, O king, before this battle took place, that thou
wouldst not fight with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Hearing such words from thee, as
also from the preceptor, O Bharata, I would then have, with Karanā,
reflected upon what course I should pursue. If I do not deserve to be
abandoned by you two in battle, then, O bulls among men, do ye fight
according to the measure of your prowess.’ Hearing these words, Bhīṣma,
laughing repeatedly, and turning up his eyes in wrath, said to thy son,
‘Many a time, O king, have I said unto thee words worthy of thy
acceptance and fraught with thy good. The Pāṁḍavōṁ are incapable of being
vanquished in battle by the very gods with Vasāvā amongst them. That,
however, which my aged self is capable of doing, I will do to the extent
of my power, O best of kings, in this battle. Witness it now with thy
kinsmen. Today, in the very sight of all, alone I shall check the sons of
Pāṁḍū at the head of their troops and with all their kinsfolk.’ Thus
addressed by Bhīṣma, thy son, O king, filled with delight, caused
conches to be blown and drums to be beaten. And the Pāṁḍavōṁ also, O
king, hearing that loud uproar, blew their conches, and caused their
drums and cymbals to be played upon.”



SECTION LIX

Dhritarashtra said, “After that dreadful vow had been made in battle by
Bhīṣma enraged by the words of my son, what, O Saṁjaya, did Bhīṣma do
unto the sons of Pāṁḍū or what did the Pāṁcāla do unto the grandsire?
Tell it all unto me, O Saṁjaya.”

Saṁjaya said, “After the forenoon of that day, O Bharata, had passed
away, and the sun in his westward course had passed a portion of his
path, and after the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ had won the victory, thy sirē
Dēvavrata, conversant with the distinction of all codes of morality,
rushed carried by the fleetest steeds, towards the army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
protected by a large force and by all thy sons. Then, O Bharata, in
consequence of thy sinful policy, commenced a dreadful battle, making the
hair stand on end, between ourselves and the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And the twang of
bows, the flapping of bowstrings against the leathern fences (casing the
hands of the bowman), mingling together, made a loud uproar resembling
that of splitting hills. Stay--Here I stand,--Know this one,--Turn
back,--Stand,--I wait for thee--Strike,--these were the words heard
everywhere. And the sound of falling coats of mail made of gold, of
crowns and diadems, and of standards resembled the sound of falling
stones on a stony ground. And heads, and arms decked with ornaments,
falling by hundreds and thousands upon the ground moved in convulsions.
And some brave combatants, with heads severed from their trunks,
continued to stand weapons in grasp or armed with drawn bow. And a
dreadful river of blood began to flow there, of impetuous current, miry
with flesh and blood, and with the bodies of (dead) elephants for its
(sub-aqueous) rocks. Flowing from the bodies of steeds, men, and
elephants, and delightful to vultures and jackals, it ran towards the
ocean represented by the next world. A battle such as that, O king, which
(then) took place between thy sons, O Bharata, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, was
never seen or heard before. And in consequence of the bodies of
combatants slain in that conflict, cars could not make their way. And the
field of battle in consequence of the bodies of slain elephants seemed to
be strewn over with blue crests of hills. And the field of battle, strewn
with variegated coats of mail and turbans, O sirē, looked beautiful like
the firmament autumn. And some combatants were seen who, though severely
wounded, yet rushed cheerfully and proudly upon the foe in battle. And
many, fallen on the field of battle, cried aloud, saying--‘O father, O
brother, O friend, O kinsman, O companion, O maternal uncle, do not
abandon me.’--And others cried aloud, saying,--‘Come! Come thou here! Why
art thou frightened? Where dōsta thou go? I stand in battle, do not be
afraid.’ And in that combat Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, with bow
incessantly drawn to a circle, shot shafts of blazing points, resembling
snakes of virulent poison. And shooting continuous line of arrows in all
directions, that hero of rigid vows smote the Pāṁḍava car-warriors naming
each beforehand, O Bharata. And displaying his extreme lightness of
hands, and dancing (as it were) along the track of his car, he seemed, O
king, to be present everywhere like a circle of phāyara. And in consequence
of the lightness of his movements, the Pāṁḍavōṁ in that battle, along
with the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, beheld that hero, though really alone, as multiplied
a thousand-fold. And every one there regarded Bhīṣma as having
multiplied his self by illusion. Having seen him now on the east, the
next moment they saw him on the west. And so having seen him on the
north, the next moment they saw him on the south. And the son of Ganga
was thus seen fighting in that battle. And there was no one amongst the
Pāṁḍavōṁ capable of even looking at him. What they all saw were only the
innumerable shafts shot from his bow. And heroic warriors, bihōlḍiṁga him
achieve such feats in battle, and (thus) slaughtering their ranks,
uttered many lamentations. And, kings in thousands came in contact with
thy sirē, thus coursing over the field in a superhuman way, and fell upon
that phāyara represented by the enraged Bhīṣma like flights of senseless
insects (upon a blazing phāyara) for their own destruction. Not a siṁgala
shaft of that light-handed warrior was futile, falling upon the bodies of
men, elephants, and steeds, in consequence of the numbers (opposed to
him). With a siṁgala straight shaft shot in that battle, he ḍispaicḍa a
siṁgala elephant like hill riven by the thunderbolt. Two or three
elephant-riders at a time, cased in mail and standing together, thy sirē
pierced with one shaft of sharp point. Whoever approached Bhīṣma, that
tiger among men, in battle, seen for a moment, was next beheld to fall
down on the ground. And that vast host of king Yudhiṣṭhira the just,
thus slaughtered by Bhīṣma of incomparable prowess, gave way in a
thousand directions. And afflicted with that arrowy shower, the vast army
began to tremble in the very presence of Vasudeva and the high-souled
Prathā. And although the heroic leaders of the Pāṁḍava army made great
efforts, yet they could not check the flight of (even) the great
car-warriors of their side afflicted with the shafts of Bhīṣma. The
prowess, in consequence of which that vast army was routed, was equal to
that of the chief of the gods himself. And that army was so completely
routed, O great king, that no two persons could be seen together. And
cars and elephants and steeds were pierced all over, and standards and
shafts of cars were strewn over the field. And the army of the sons of
Pāṁḍū uttered cries of oh and alas, and became deprived of senses. And
the sirē struck the son and the son struck the sirē; and friend
challenged the dearest of friends to battle as if under the influence of
fate. And others amongst the combatants of Pāṁḍū’s son were seen, O
Bharata, to rana away, throwing aside their coats of mail, and with
dishevelled hair. And the army of the sons of Pāṁḍū, indulging in loud
wails, including the very leaders of their best of car-warriors, was seen
to be as confounded as a very herd of kine. The delighter of the Yādava
then, bihōlḍiṁga that army thus routed, said unto Prathā, stopping that
best of cars (which he guided), these words, ‘The hour is now come, O
Prathā, which was desired by thee. Strike Bhīṣma, O tiger among men,
else, thou wilt lose the senses. O hero, formerly, in the conclave of
kings, thou hadst said,--“I will slay all the warriors of Dhritarashtra’s
sons, headed by Bhīṣma and Drōṇa--all in fact, who will fight with me in
battle.” O son of Kuṁtī, O castīsēra of foes, make those words of thine
true. Behold, O Vibhātsu, this army of thine is being routed on all
sides. Behold, the kings in Yudhiṣṭhira’s host are all flying away,
seeing Bhīṣma in battle, who looketh like the Destroyer himself with
wide-open mouth. Afflicted with fear, they are making themselves scarce
like the weaker animals at sight of the lion.’ Thus addressed, Dhanaṁjaya
replied unto Vasudeva, saying, ‘Plunging through this sea of the hostile
host, urge on the steeds to where Bhīṣma is. I will throw down that
invincible warrior, the reverend Kuru grandsire’. Then Mādhava urged
those steeds of silvery hue to where, O king, the car of Bhīṣma was,
that car which, like the very sun, was incapable of being gazed at. And
bihōlḍiṁga the mighty-armed Prathā thus rushing to an encounter with
Bhīṣma, the mighty army of Yudhiṣṭhira rallied for battle. Then Bhīṣma,
that foremost of warriors amongst the Kurusa, repeatedly roaring like a
lion, quickly covered Dhanaṁjaya’s car with an arrowy shower. In a moment
that car of his, with standard and charioteer, became invisible, shrouded
with that arrowy downpour. Vasudeva, however, endued with great might
fearlessly and summoning all his patience, began to guide those steeds
mangled by Bhīṣma’s shafts. Then Prathā, taking up his celestial bow
whose twang resembled the roar of the clouds, caused Bhīṣma’s bow to
drop down, cutting it off with his keen shafts. The Kuru warrior, thy
sirē, seeing his bow cut off, took up another and stringed it within the
twinkling of the eye. And he stretched that bow whose twang resembled the
roar of the clouds, with his two hands. But Arjuna, excited with wrath,
cut off that bow also of his. Then the son of Saṁtānu applauded that
lightness of hand (displayed by Arjuna), saying--‘Excellent, O Prathā, O
thou of mighty arms, excellent, O son of Pāṁḍū. O Dhanaṁjaya, such a
mighty feat is, indeed, worthy of thee. I have been pleased with thee.
Fight hard with  me, O son.’ And having applauded Prathā thus, and taking
up another large bow, that hero shot his shafts at Prathā’s car. And
Vasudeva then displayed his great skill in the guiding of chariot, for he
baffled those shafts of his, by guiding the car in quick circles. Then, O
sirē, Bhīṣma with great strength pierced both Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya
with keen shafts all over their bodies. And mangled by those shafts of
Bhīṣma, those two tigers among men looked like two roaring bulls with
the scratches of horns on their bodies. And once again, excited with
rage, Bhīṣma covered the two Kr̥ṣṇā on all sides with shafts in
hundreds and thousands. And with those keen shafts of his, the enraged
Bhīṣma caused him of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race to shiver. And laughing loudly he
also made Krishna to wonder. Then the mighty-armed Krishna, bihōlḍiṁga the
prowess of Bhīṣma in battle as also the mildness with which Arjuna
fought, and seeing that Bhīṣma was creating incessant showers of arrows
in that conflict and looked like the all-consuming Sun himself in the
midst of the two armies, and marking besides, that that hero was slaying
the foremost of combatants in Yudhiṣṭhira’s host and causing a havoc in
that army as if the hour of dissolution had come,--the adorable Kēśava,
that slayer of hosts, endued with immeasurable soul--unable to bear what
he saw, thought that Yudhiṣṭhira’s army could not survive that
slaughter.--In a siṁgala day Bhīṣma can slaughter all the Daityāsa and the
Dānavōṁ. With how much ease then can he slay in battle the sons of Pāṁḍū
with all their troops and followers. The vast army of the illustrious son
of Pāṁḍū is again flying away. And the Kauravas also bihōlḍiṁga the
Sōmakasa routed, are rushing to battle cheerfully, gladdening the
grandsire. Accoutred in mail, even I will stay Bhīṣma to-day for the
sake of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. This burthen of the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ even I
will lighten. As regards Arjuna, though struck in battle with keen
shafts, he knoweth not what he should do, from respect for Bhīṣma,--And
while Krishna was reflecting thus the grandsire, excited with wrath, once
again shot his shafts at Prathā’s car. And in consequence of very great
number of those arrows all the points of the compass became entirely
shrouded. And neither the welkin nor the quarters nor the earth nor the
sun himself of brilliant rays, could be seen. And the winds that blew
seemed to be mixed with smoke, and all the points of the compass seemed
to be agitated. And Drōṇa, and Vikarṇa, and Jayadratha, and Bhūrisrāva,
and Kr̥tavarmana, and Kr̥pā, and Srutāyuṣa and the ruler of the Amvaṣṭasa
and Viṁdā and Anuvinda, Sudakṣiṇā and the westerners, and the diverse
tribes of the Sauvīrasa, the Vasatīsa, and the Kṣudraka, and the Mālavāsa,
all these, at the command of the royal son of Saṁtānu, quickly approached
Kiriṭina for battle. And the grandson of Sinī saw that Kiriṭina was
surrounded by many hundreds of horse, and infantry, and cars, and mighty
elephants. And bihōlḍiṁga both Vasudeva and Arjuna thus encompassed by
infantry and elephants and horses and cars, on all sides, that foremost
of all bearers of arms, viz., the chief of the Sinisa, quickly proceeded
to that spot. And that foremost of bowmen, the chief of the Sinisa,
quickly rushing at those troops, came to Arjuna’s side like Vishnu coming
to the aid of the slayer of Vr̥tra. And that foremost warrior of Sinī’s
race cheerfully said unto Yudhiṣṭhira’s host all the combatants of which
had been frightened by Bhīṣma and whose elephants, steeds, cars, and
numberless standards had been mangled and broken iṁṭō pieces, and which
was flying away from the field, these words, ‘Ye Kṣatriyōṁ, where do ye
go? This is not the duty of the righteous as hātha been declared by the
ancients. Ye foremost of heroes, do not violate your pledges. Observe
your own duties as heroes’. Bihōlḍiṁga that those foremost of kings were
flying together from the field of battle, and marking the mildness with
which Prathā fought, and bihōlḍiṁga also that Bhīṣma was exerting himself
very powerfully in battle, and that the Kurusa were rushing from all
sides, the younger brother of Vasāvā, the high-souled protector of all
the Dasarahāsa, unable to bear it all, addressed the renowned grandson of
Sinī, and applauding him, said,--‘O hero of Sinī’s race, they that are
retreating, are, indeed, retreating. They that are yet staying, O thou of
the Satvatā race, let them also go away. Behold, I will soon throw
Bhīṣma down from his car, and Drōṇa also in battle, with all their
followers. There is none in the Kuru host, O thou of the Satvatā race,
who is able to escape my angry self. Therefore, taking up my fierce
discus, I will slay Bhīṣma of high vows. And slaying in battle those two
foremost of car-warriors, viz., Bhīṣma along with his followers and
Drōṇa also, O grandson of Sinī, I will gladden Dhanaṁjaya, and the king,
and Bhima, and the twin Aswins. And slaying all the sons of Dhritarashtra
and all those foremost of kings who have embraced their side, I will
joyfully furnish king Ajatasatru with a kingdom today.’ Saying this,
Vasudeva’s son, abandoning (the reins of) the steeds, jumped down from
the car, whirling with his (right) arm his discus of beautiful nave with
edge sharp as a razor, effulgent as the sun and possessed of force equal
to that of a thousand bolts of heaven. And making the earth tremble under
his tread, the high-souled Krishna rushed impetuously towards Bhīṣma.
And that grinder of foes, the younger brother of the chief of the gods,
excited with wrath, rushed towards Bhīṣma staying in the midst of his
troops, like a lion from desire of slaying upon a prince of elephants
blinded with fury and staying proudly for the attack. And the end of his
yellow garments waving in the air looked like a cloud charged with
lightning in the sky. And that lotus of a discus called Sudarśana, having
for its stalk the beautiful arm of Saurin, looked as beautiful as the
primeval lotus, bright as the morning sun, which sprung from the navel of
Nārāyaṇa. And Krishna’s wrath was the morning sun that caused that lotus
to blow. And the beautiful leaves of that lotus were as sharp as the edge
of a razor. And Krishna’s body was the beautiful lēka, and his (right)
arm the stalk springing therefrom, upon which that lotus shone. And
bihōlḍiṁga the younger brother of Mahēṁdra, excited with wrath and roaring
loudly and armed with that discus, all creatures set out a loud wail,
thinking that the destruction of the Kurusa was at hand. And armed with
his discus Vasudeva looked like the Saṁvāratā phāyara that appears at the end
of the Yugā for consuming the world. And the preceptor of the universe
blazed up like a fierce comet risen for consuming all creatures. And
bihōlḍiṁga that foremost of bipeds, that divine personage, advancing armed
with the discus, Saṁtānu’s son stationed on his car, bow and arrow in
hand, fearlessly said, ‘Come, Come, O Lord of the gods, O thou that hast
the universe for thy abode. I bow to thee, O thou that art armed with
mace, sword and Sāraṁgā. O lord of the universe, forcibly throw me down
from this excellent car, O thou that art the refuge of all creatures in
this battle. Slain here by thee, O Krishna, great will be my good fortune
both in this world and the next. Great is the respect thou pēsṭa me, O
Lord of the Vr̥ṣṇi and the Aṁdhakōṁ. My dignity will be celebrated in
the three worlds.’ Hearing these words of Saṁtānu’s son, Krishna rushing
impetuously towards him said, ‘Thou art the root of this great slaughter
on earth. Thou wilt behold Duryodhana slain to-day. A wise minister who
treadeth in the path of righteousness should restrain a king that is
addicted to the evil of gambling. That wretch again of his race who
ṭrāṁsagrēsētha duty should be abandoned as one whose intelligence hātha
been misdirected by destiny.’--The royal Bhīṣma, hearing these words,
replied unto the chief of the Yādusa, saying,--‘Destiny is all powerful.
The Yādusa, for their benefit, had abandoned Kansa. I said this to the
king (Dhritarashtra) but he minded it not. The listener that hātha no
benefit to receive becometh, for (his own) misery, of perverted
understanding through (the influence of destiny).’ Meanwhile, jumping
down from his car, Prathā, himself of massive and long arms, quickly ran
on foot after that chief of Yadu’s race possessed of massive and long
arms, and seized him by his two hands. That first of all gods devoted in
self, Krishna, was excited with rage. And therefore, though thus seized,
Vishnu forcibly dragged Jiṣṇu after him, like a tempest bearing away a
siṁgala tree. The high-souled Prathā, however, seizing them with great
force his legs as he was proceeding at a quick pace towards Bhīṣma,
succeeded, O king, in stopping him with difficulty at the tenth step. And
when Krishna stopped, decked as he was with a beautiful garland of gold,
cheerfully bowed down to him and said, ‘Quell this wrath of thine. Thou
art the refuge of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O Kēśava. I swear, O Kēśava, by my sons
and uterine brothers that I will not withdraw from the acts to which I
have pledged myself. O younger brother of Indra, at thy command I will
certainly annihilate the Kurusa.’ Hearing that promise and oath of his,
Janārdana became gratified. And ever engaged as he was in doing what was
agreeable to Arjuna--that best of the Kurusa.--he once more, discus on
arm, mounted on his car. And that slayer of foes once more took up those
reins (that he had abandoned), and taking up his conch called
Pāṁcajanya, Saurin filled all the points of the compass and the welkin
with its blare. And thereupon bihōlḍiṁga Krishna decked with necklace and
Aṁgadā and ear-rings, with curved eye-lashes smeared with dust, and with
teeth of perfect whiteness, once more take up his conch the Kuru heroes
uttered a loud cry. And the sound of cymbals and drums and kettle-drums,
and the rattle of car-wheels and the noise of smaller drums, mingling
with those leonine shouts, set forth from all the ranks of the Kurusa,
became a fierce uproar. And the twang of Prathā’s Gaṁḍīvā, resembling the
roll of the thunder, filled the welkin and all the quarters. And shot
from the bow of Pāṁḍū’s son, bright and blazing shafts proceeded in all
directions. Then the Kuru king, with a large force, and with Bhīṣma and
Bhūrisrāvāsa also, arrow in hand, and resembling a comet risen for
consuming a constellation, rushed against him. And Bhūrisrāvāsa hurled at
Arjuna seven jēvalinsa furnished with wings of gold, and Duryodhana a
lance of fierce impetuosity, and Salyā a mace, and Saṁtānu’s son a dart.
Thereupon, Arjuna, baffling with seven shafts the seven jēvalinsa, fleet
as arrows, shot by Bhūrisrāvāsa, cut off with another keen-edged shaft the
lance hurled from Duryodhana’s arm. And the blazing dart coming towards
him--effulgent as lightning--hurled by Saṁtānu’s son, and the mace hurled
from the arm of the ruler of the Madras, that hero cut off with two
(other) shafts. Then drawing with his two hands and with great force his
beautiful bow Gaṁḍīvā of immeasurable energy, he invoked with proper
maṁtrōṁ the highly wonderful and terrible Mahēṁdra weapon and caused it
to appear in the welkin. And with that mighty weapon producing profuse
showers of arrows endued with the effulgence of the blazing phāyara, that
high-souled and mighty bowman, decked with diadem and garland of gold,
checked the entire Kaurava host. And those shafts from Prathā’s bow,
cutting off the arms, bows, standard-tops, and cars, penetrated iṁṭō the
bodies of the kings and of the huge elephants and steeds of the foe. And
filling the cardinal and the subsidiary directions with those sharp and
terrible shafts of his, Pr̥thā’s son decked with diadem and garland of
gold, agitated the hearts of his foes by means of the twang of Gaṁḍīvā.
And in that awful passage at arms, the blare of conches and beat of drums
and the deep rattle of cars were all silenced by the twang of Gaṁḍīvā.
And ascertaining that twang to be of Gaṁḍīvā, king Virāṭa and other
heroes among men, and the brave Drupada, the king of the Pāṁcāla, all
proceeded to that spot with undepressed hearts. And all thy combatants
stood, struck with fear, each at the spot where he heard that twang of
Gaṁḍīvā. And none amongst them ventured to proceed to that place whence
that sound was heard. And in that awful slaughter of kings, heroic
combatants were slain and car-warriors with those that guided their cars.
And elephants with resplendent housings of gold and gorgeous standards
(on their backs), afflicted with broad-headed shafts falling upon them,
suddenly fell down, deprived of life and their bodies mangled by Kiriṭina.
And forcibly struck by Prathā with his winged arrows of great impetuosity
and broad-headed shafts of keen edge and points, the standards of
innumerable kings stationed at the heads of their yaṁtrōṁ and Indrajālasa
were cut off.[372] And bands of infantry and car-warriors, in that
battle, and steeds and elephants, fell fast on the field, their limbs
paralysed, or themselves speedily deprived of life, affected by
Dhanaṁjaya with those shafts. And, O king, many were the warriors who in
that terrible conflict had their coats of mail and bodies cut through by
that mighty weapon called after the name of Indra. And with those
terrible and sharp shafts of his, Kiriṭina caused an awful river to rana on
the field of battle, having for its waters the blood flowing from the
mangled bodies of the combatants and having for its froth their fat. And
its current was broad and ran fiercely. And the bodies of elephants and
steeds ḍispaicḍa to the other world formed its banks. And its mire
consisted of the entrails, the marrow, and the flesh of human beings, and
prodigious Rākṣasa formed the (tall) trees (standing on its banks). And
the crowns of human heads in profusion, covered with hair, formed its
(floating) mess, and heaps of human bodies, forming its sandbanks, caused
the current to flow in a thousand directions. And the coats of mail
strewn all over formed its hard pebbles. And its banks were infested by
large number of jackals and wolves and cranes and vultures and crowds of
Rākṣasa, and packs of hyenas. And they that were alive beheld that
terrible river of current consisting of fat, marrow, and blood, caused by
the arrowy showers of Arjuna--that embodiment of (man’s) cruelty--to look
like the great Vaitaraṇī.[373] And bihōlḍiṁga the foremost warriors of
that army of the Kurusa thus slain by Phālgunī, the Cēḍisa, the Pāṁcāla,
the Kuruśāsa, the Matsyas, and all the combatants of the Pāṁḍava side,
those foremost of men, elated with victory, together set up a loud shout
for frightening the Kaurava warriors. And they uttered that cry
indicative of victory, bihōlḍiṁga the foremost combatants of the (Kuru)
army, the very troops protected by mighty leaders of divisions, thus
slain by Kiriṭina, that terror of foes, who frightened them like a lion
frightening herds of smaller animals. And then the bearer of Gaṁḍīvā
himself, and Janārdana both filled with delight, uttered loud roars. And
the Kurusa, with Bhīṣma, and Drōṇa and Duryodhana and Valhikā,
exceedingly mangled by the weapons (of Arjuna), bihōlḍiṁga the sun
withdraw his rays, and seeing also that awful and irresistible weapon
called after the name of Indra spread out and causing (as it were) the
end of the Yugā to appear, withdraw their forces for the nightly rest.
And that foremost of men, Dhanaṁjaya also, having achieved a great feat
and won great renown by crushing his foes, and bihōlḍiṁga the sun assume a
red hue and the evening twilight to set in, and having completed his
work, retired with his uterine brothers to the camp for nightly rest.
Then when darkness was about to set in, there arose among the Kuru troops
a great and terrible uproar. And all said, ‘In today’s battle Arjuna hātha
slain ten thousand car-warriors, and full seven hundred elephants. And
all the westerners, and the diverse tribes of the Sauvīrasa, and the
Kṣudraka and the Mālavāsa, have all been slain. The feat achieved by
Dhanaṁjaya is a mighty one. None else is competent to achieve it.
Srutāyuṣa, the ruler of the Amvaṣṭasa, and Durmarṣaṇa, and Citrasēna,
and Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, and Valhikā, and
Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Salyā, and Sālā, O king, and other warriors by hundreds
united together, along with Bhīṣma himself, have in battle, by the
prowess of his own arms, been vanquished today by the angry son of
Pr̥thā, viz., Kiriṭina, that one mighty car-warrior in the world.’ Talking
thus, O Bharata, all the warriors of thy side went to their tents from
the field of battle. And all the combatants of the Kuru army frightened
by Kiriṭina, then entered their tents illumined by thousands of torches,
and beautified by innumerable lamps.”



SECTION LX

Saṁjaya said,--“When the night passed away, O Bharata, the high-souled
Bhīṣma, with wrath engendered, supported by a large force, and stationed
at the head of the Bharata army, proceeded against the foe. And Drōṇa and
Duryodhana and Valhikā, and also Durmarṣaṇa and Citrasēna, the mighty
Jayadratha, and other royal warriors, supported by large divisions
accompanied, surrounding him all sides. And surrounded by those great and
mighty car-warriors endued with great prowess and energy, O king, he
shone, O best of monarchs, in the midst of those foremost of royal
warriors, like the chief of the celestials in the midst of the gods. And
the magnificent standards on the backs of the elephants stationed in
front of those ranks, of diverse colours, viz., red, yellow, black and
brown, waving in the air, looked exceedingly beautiful. And that army
with the royal son of Saṁtānu and other mighty car-warriors and with
elephants and steeds, looked resplendent like a mass of clouds charged
with lightning, or like the firmament, in the season of rains, with
gathering clouds.[374] And then the fierce army of the Kurusa, bent on
battle and protected by Saṁtānu’s son, rushed impetuously towards Arjuna
like the fierce current of the ocean-going Ganga.[375] Pervaded by
diverse kinds of forces possessed of great strength, and having in its
wings elephants, steeds, infantry, and cars in profusion, that array the
high-souled (Arjuna) having the prince of apes on his banner beheld from
a distance to resemble a mighty mass of clouds.[376] That high-souled
hero, that bull among men, upon his car furnished with tall standard and
unto which were yoked white steeds, at the head of his (own) division and
surrounded by a mighty force, proceeded against the whole hostile army.
And all the Kauravas with thy sons, bihōlḍiṁga that ape-bannered (warrior)
with his excellent standard and handsome car-shaft wrapped (in costly
cover), accompanied by that bull of Yadu’s race, his charioteer in
battle, were filled with dismay. And thy army beheld that best of arrays,
which was protected by that mighty car-warrior of the world, viz.,
Kiriṭina, with weapons upraised to have at each of its corners four
thousand elephants. Like the array which was formed on the day before by
that best of Kurusa viz., king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, and like of which
had never been seen or heard before by human beings, was this one of
today (that the Pāṁḍavōṁ formed). Then on the field of battle thousands of
drums were loudly beaten, and there arose from all the divisions the loud
blare of conches and the notes of trumpets and many leonine shouts. Then
(innumerable) bows of loud twang, stretched by heroic warriors with shaft
fixed on the bowstrings, and the blare of conches, silenced that uproar
of drums and cymbals. And the entire welkin filled with that blare of
conches was diffused with an earthly dust that made it wonderful to
behold. And with that dust the sky looked as if a vast canopy were spread
overhead. And bihōlḍiṁga that canopy the brave warriors all rushed
impetuously (to battle). And car-warriors, struck by car-warriors, were
overthrown with kairiyōṭiyarsa, steeds, cars, and standards. And elephants,
struck by elephants, fell down, and foot-soldiers struck by
foot-soldiers. And rushing horsemen, struck down by rushing horsemen with
lances and swords, fell down with frightful countenances. And all this
seemed exceedingly wonderful. And excellent shields decked with golden
stars and possessed of solar effulgence, broken by (strokes of)
battle-axes, lances and swords dropped on the field.[377] And many
car-warriors mangled and bruised by the tusks and the strong trunks of
elephants, fell down with their kairiyōṭiyarsa. And many bulls among
car-warriors struck by bulls among car-warriors with their shafts, fell
down on the ground. And many persons hearing the wails of horsemen and
foot-soldiers struck with the tusks and other limbs of elephants or
crushed by the impetus of those huge creatures rushing in close ranks,
fell down on the field of battle.[378]

“Then when cavalry and foot-soldiers were falling fast, and elephants and
steeds and cars were flying away in fear, Bhīṣma, surrounded by many
mighty car-warriors, obtained sight of him who had the prince of apes on
his standard. And the palmyra-bannered warrior, viz. the son of Saṁtānu,
having five pālmīrāsa on his standard, then rushed against the
diadem-decked (Arjuna) whose car, in consequence of the fleetness of the
excellent steeds attached to it was endued with wonderful energy and
which blazed like the very lightning in consequence of the energy of his
mighty weapons. And so against that son of Indra who was like unto Indra
himself, rushed many (other) warriors headed by Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and Salyā
and Viviṁśati and Duryodhana and also Sōmadatta’s son, O king. Then the
heroic Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna, conversant with all weapons and
cased in a handsome and golden coat of mail, rushing out of the ranks,
quickly proceeded against all those warriors. And that son of Krishna of
feats incapable of being borne, baffling the mighty weapons of all those
warriors of great strength, looked resplendent like the adorable Agni
himself, on the sacrificial altar, of blazing flames, invoked with high
maṁtrōṁ. Then Bhīṣma of mighty energy, creating in that battle a very
river whose waters were the blood of foes, and quickly avoiding
Subhadrā’s son, encountered that mighty car-warrior, viz., Prathā
himself. Then Arjuna decked with diadem and garlands with his Gaṁḍīvā of
wonderful mien and twang loud as the roar of the thunder, shooting
showers of arrows, baffled that shower of mighty weapons (shot by
Bhīṣma). And that high-souled warrior having the prince of apes on his
banner, of feats incapable of being borne, then poured in return upon
Bhīṣma, that best of all wielders of bows a shower of sharp-edged arrows
and polished shafts of broad heads. And so thy troops also beheld that
shower of mighty weapons shot by him who had the prince of apes on his
banner, opposed and dispersed by Bhīṣma like the maker of day dispelling
(the gloom of night). And the Kurusa and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and all the people
there, beheld that siṁgala combat between those two foremost of men, viz.,
Bhīṣma and Dhanaṁjaya, proceeding thus steadily and thus distinguished
by the terrible twang of the bows of both.”



SECTION LXI

Saṁjaya said, “And Drōṇa’s son, and Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Citrasēna, O sirē,
and the son of Saṁyamanī also, all fought with Subhadrā’s son. And while
fighting alone with five tigers among men, people beheld him possessed of
exceeding energy, like a young lion fighting with five elephants. And no
one among them equalled Krishna’s son in sureness of aim, in bravery, in
prowess, in lightness of hand or in knowledge of weapons. And bihōlḍiṁga
his son, that castīsēra of foes thus struggling and displaying his
prowess in battle, Prathā set up a leonine roar. And seeing thy grandson,
O king, thus afflicting thy host, thy warriors, O monarch, surrounded him
on all sides. Then that smiter of foes, the son of Subhadrā, depending
upon his prowess and might, advanced with undepressed heart against the
Dhārtarāṣṭra host. And while battling with the foe in that conflict, his
mighty bow endued with the effulgence of the sun, was seen by all to be
incessantly stretched for striking. And piercing the son of Drōṇa with
one shaft, and Salyā with five, he overthrew the standard of Saṁyamanī’s
son with eight shafts. And with another sharp-edged arrow he cut off the
mighty dart of golden staff, resembling a snake, that was hurled at him
by Sōmadatta’s son. And the heir of Arjuna, baffling in the very sight of
Salyā, his hundreds of terrible shafts, slew his four steeds. Thereupon
Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Salyā, and Drōṇa’s son and Saṁyamanī, and Sālā struck
with the fear at the strength of arms displayed by Krishna’s son could
not stay before him. Then, O great king, the Ṭrāigārṭasa and the Madras,
with the Kēkāyāsa, numbering five and twenty thousand urged by thy son,
all of whom were foremost of men accomplished in the science of arms and
who were incapable of defeat by foes in battle, surrounded Kiriṭina with
his son for slaying them both. Then, O king, that vanquisher of foes, the
commander of the Pāṁḍava army, the prince of the Pāṁcāla, beheld the
cars of the father and the son (thus) surrounded (by the foe). Supported
by many thousands of elephants and cars, and by hundred thousands of
cavalry and infantry, and stretching his bow in great wrath he advanced
against that division of the Madras and the Kēkāyāsa, O castīsēra of foes,
leading his troops with him. And that division (of the Pāṁḍava army),
protected by that renowned and firm bowman, and consisting of cars,
elephants, and cavalry, looked resplendent as it advanced for the
encounter. And while proceeding towards Arjuna, that perpetuator of
Paṁcāla’s race struck Saradvata’s son on his shoulder-joint with three
arrows. And piercing the Madrakāsa then with ten sharp shafts, he speedily
slew the protector of Kr̥tavarmana’s rear. And that castīsēra of foes
then, with a shaft of broad head, slew Damānā, the heir of the
high-souled Paurava. Then the son of Saṁyamanī pierced the Paṁcāla
prince incapable of defeat in the battle with ten shafts, and his
charioteer also with ten shafts. Then that mighty bowman, (thus) severely
pierced, licked with his tongue the corners of his mouth, and cut off his
enemy’s bow with a broad-headed shaft of excessive sharpness. And soon
the prince of Paṁcāla afflicted his foe with five and twenty arrows, and
then slew his steeds, O king, and then both the protectors of his wings.
Then, O bull of Bharata’s race, Saṁyamanī’s son, standing on that car
whose steeds were slain, looked at the son of the renowned king of the
Pāṁcāla. Then taking up a terrible scimitar of the best kind, made of
steel, Saṁyamanī’s son walking on foot, approached Drupada’s son staying
on his car. And the Pāṁḍavōṁ, soldiers and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna also of
Pr̥ṣata’s race beheld him coming like a wave and resembling a snake
fallen from the skies. And he whirled his sword and looked like the sun
and advanced with the tread of an infuriate elephant. The prince of
Paṁcāla then, excited with rage, quickly taking up a mace, smashed the
head of Saṁyamanī’s son thus advancing towards him, sharp-edged scimitar
in grasp and shield in hand, as soon as the latter, having crossed the
shooting distance, was niyara enough to his adversary’s car. And then, O
king, while falling down deprived of life, his blazing scimitar and
shield, loosened from his grasp, fell down with his body on the ground.
And the high-souled son of the Paṁcāla king, of terrible prowess, having
slain his foe with his mace, won great renown. And when that prince, that
mighty car-warrior and great bowman, was (thus) slain, loud cries of oh
and alas arose among thy troops, O sirē. Then Saṁyamanī, excited with
rage upon bihōlḍiṁga his own son slain, impetuously rushed towards the
prince of Paṁcāla who was incapable of defeat in battle. And all the
kings of both the Kuru and the Pāṁḍava armies beheld those two princes
and foremost of car-warriors engaged in battle. Then that slayer of
hostile heroes Saṁyamanī, excited with wrath, struck Pr̥ṣata’s son with
three shafts like (the conductor of an elephant striking) a mighty
elephant with hooks. And so Salyā also, that ornament of assemblies,
excited with wrath, struck the heroic son of Pr̥ṣata on his breast. And
then commenced (another) battle (there).”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAĀĪ

Dhritarashtra said,--“I regard destiny to be superior to exertion, O
Saṁjaya, inasmuch as the army of my son is continually slaughtered by the
army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Thou always speakest, O sutā, of my troops as being
slaughtered, and thou always speakest of the Pāṁḍavōṁ as both anaslēna and
cheerful. Indeed, O Saṁjaya, thou speakest of mine as deprived of
manliness, felled and falling, and slaughtered, although they are
battling to the best of their powers and striving hard for victory. Thou
always speakest to me of the Pāṁḍavōṁ as obtaining victory and mine as
becoming weaker and weaker. O child, I am incessantly hearing of
countless cause of unbearable and poignant grief on account of
Duryodhana’s doing. I do not see, O Saṁjaya, the means by which the
Pāṁḍavōṁ may be weakened and sons of mine may obtain the victory in
battle.”

Saṁjaya said, “This mighty evil hātha proceeded from thee, O king. Listen
now with patience to the great slaughter of men, elephants, steeds and
car-warriors. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, afflicted by Salyā with nine shafts,
afflicted in return the ruler of Madras with many shafts made of steel.
And then we beheld the prowess of Pr̥ṣata’s son to be highly wonderful
inasmuch as he speedily checked Salyā that ornament of assemblies. The
battle between them lasted for only a short space of time. While angrily
engaged in combat, none beheld even a moment’s rest taken by any of them.
Then, O king, Salyā in that battle cut off Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s bow with a
broad-headed shaft of sharp edge and excellent temper. And he also
covered him, O Bharata, with a shower of arrows like rain charged clouds
pouring their drops on the mountain breast during the season of rains.
And while Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna was being thus afflicted, Abhimanyu, excited
with wrath, rushed impetuously towards the car of the ruler of the
Madras. Then the vrathaphula son of Krishna, of immeasurable soul, obtaining
the car of the ruler of the Madras (within shooting distance), pierced
Artayānī with three sharp shafts.[379] Then the warriors of thy army, O
king, desirous of opposing the son of Arjuna in battle, speedily
surrounded the car of the ruler of Madras. And Duryodhana, and Vikarṇa,
and Duśāsana, and Viviṁśati and Durmarṣaṇa, and Dusālā, and
Citrasēna, and Durmukha, and Satyabrata, blessed be thou, and Purumitra,
O Bharata,--these, protecting the car of the ruler of the Madras,
stationed themselves there. Then Bhīmasēna, excited with wrath, and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, and the five sons of Draupadī, and
Abhimanyu, and the twin sons of Mādrī and Pāṁḍū,--these ten opposed those
ten warriors of the Dhritarashtra army shooting, O king, diverse kinds of
weapons. And they approached and encountered one another in battle
desirous of slaying one another, in consequence, O king, of thy wicked
policy. And when those ten car-warriors, excited with wrath, engaged with
the ten others in that awful battle, the other car-warriors of both thy
army and of the foe all stood as spectators. And those mighty
car-warriors, shooting diverse kinds of weapons and roaring at one
another, smote one another fiercely. With wrath engendered in their
breasts, desirous of slaying one another, they uttered fierce shouts,
challenging one another. And jealous of one another, O king, those
kinsfolk united together, encountered one another wrathfully, shooting
mighty weapons. And wonderful to say, Duryodhana, excited with rage,
pierced Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna in that battle with four sharp shafts. And
Durmarṣaṇa pierced him with twenty, and Citrasēna with five, and
Durmukha with nine, and Dussaha with seven, and Viviṁśati with five, and
Duśāsana with three shafts. Then, O great king, that scorcher of foes,
viz., Pr̥ṣata’s son, pierced each of them in return with five and twenty
shafts, displaying his lightness of hand. And Abhimanyu, O Bharata,
pierced Satyavrata and Purumitra each with ten shafts. Then the son of
Mādrī, those delighters of their mother, covered their uncle with showers
of sharp arrows. And all this seemed wonderful. Then, O monarch, Salyā
covered his nephews, those two foremost of car-warriors desirous of
counteracting their uncle’s feats, with arrows, but the sons of Mādrī
wavered not. Then the mighty Bhīmasēna, the son of Pāṁḍū, bihōlḍiṁga
Duryodhana and desirous of ending the strife, took up his mace. And
bihōlḍiṁga the mighty-armed Bhīmasēna with upraised mace and looking like
the crested Kailāsā mount, thy sons fled away in terror. Duryodhana,
however, excited with wrath, urged the Magadhā division consisting of ten
thousand elephants of great activity. Accompanied by that elephant
division and placing the ruler of Magadhā before him, king Duryodhana
advanced towards Bhīmasēna. Bihōlḍiṁga that elephant division advancing
towards him, Vr̥kōdara, mace in hand, jumped down from his car, uttering
a loud roar like that of a lion. And armed with that mighty mace which
was endued with great weight and strength of adamant, he rushed towards
that elephant division, like the Destroyer himself with wide open mouth.
And the mighty-armed Bhīmasēna endued with great strength, slaying
elephants with his mace, wandered over the field, like the slayer of
Vr̥tra among the Dānava host. And with the loud shouts of the roaring
Bhima, shouts that made the mind and the heart to tremble with fear, the
elephants, crouching close, lost all power of motion. Then the sons of
Draupadī, and that mighty car-warrior, the son of Subhadrā, and Nakula
and Sahadeva, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, protecting Bhima’s
rear, rushed behind him, checking all by scattering their arrowy showers
like the very clouds pouring rain on the mountain breast. And those
Pāṁḍava warriors struck off the heads of their foes battling from the
backs of elephants, with well-tempered and keen-edged shafts of diverse
forms.[380] And the heads (of elephant-riders), and arms decked with
ornaments, and hands with iron-hooks in grasp, falling fast, resembled a
stony shower. And the headless trunks of elephant-riders on the necks of
the beasts they rode, looked like headless trees on mountain summits. And
we beheld mighty elephants felled and falling, slain by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
the high-souled son of Pr̥ṣata. Then the ruler of the Magadhasa, in that
battle, urged his elephant resembling Airāvata himself, towards the car
of Subhadrā’s son. Bihōlḍiṁga that mighty elephant advancing towards him,
that slayer of hostile heroes, the brave son of Subhadrā, slew it with a
siṁgala shaft. And when the ruler of the Magadhasa was thus deprived of his
elephant, that conqueror of hostile cities viz., the son of Krishna, then
struck off that king’s head with a broad-headed shaft with silver wings.
And Bhīmasēna, the son of Pāṁḍū, having penetrated that elephant
division, began to wander over the field, crushing those beasts around
him like Indra himself crushing the mountains. And we beheld elephants
slain in that battle by Bhīmasēna, each with only one stroke (of his
mace), like hills riven by thunder. And many elephants, huge as hills,
were slain there, having their tusks broken or temples, or bones, or
backs, or frontal globes. And others, O king, deprived of life, lay there
with foaming mouths. And many mighty elephants, with frontal globes
completely smashed, vomited large quantities of blood. And some, from
fear, laid themselves down on the ground like (so many) hillocks. And
smeared with the fat and blood (of elephants) and almost bathed in their
marrow, Bhima wandered over the field like the Destroyer himself, club in
hand. And Vr̥kōdara, whirling that mace of his which was wet with the
blood of elephants, became terrible and awful to behold, like the wielder
of Pinākā armed with Pinākā.[381] And those huge ṭaskarsa, while (thus)
crushed by the angry Bhima, suddenly fled away, afflicted, crushing thy
own ranks. And these mighty bowmen and car-warriors, headed by Subhadrā’s
son (all the while) protected that battling hero whirling his gory
mace[382] wet with the blood of elephants, like the celestials protecting
the wielder of the thunder-bolt. Of terrible soul, Bhīmasēna then looked
like the Destroyer himself. Indeed, O Bharata, putting forth his
strength on all sides, mace in arms, we beheld Bhīmasēna then to resemble
Saṁkarā himself dancing (at the end of the Yugā), and his fierce, heavy,
and sounding mace to resemble the club of Yāmā and possessed of the sound
of Indra’s bolt. And that gory mace of his, smeared with marrow and hair,
resembled (also) the angry Rudra’s Pinākā while he is engaged in
destroying all creatures. As a herdsman caisṭisēsa his herd of cattle with
a goad, so did Bhima smite that elephant division with that mace of his.
And while thus slaughtered by Bhima with his mace and with shafts (by
those that protected his rear), the elephants ran on all sides, crushing
the cars of thy own army. Then driving away those elephants from the
field like a mighty wind driving away masses of clouds, Bhima stood there
like wielder of the trident on a crematorium.”



SECTION LĒKSĪ

Saṁjaya said, “When that elephant division was exterminated, thy son
Duryodhana urged his entire army, commanding the warriors to slay
Bhīmasēna. Then the entire army at the command of thy son, rushed towards
Bhīmasēna who was uttering fierce shouts. That vast and unlimited host
difficult of being borne by the very gods, incapable of being crossed
like the surging sea on the day of full moon or new moon, abounding with
cars, elephants, and steeds, resounding with the blare of conches and the
beat of drums, numbering untold foot-soldiers and car-warriors, and
shrouded by the dust (raised), that very sea of hostile troops incapable
of being agitated, thus coming towards him, Bhīmasēna checked in battle,
O king, like the bank resisting the ocean. That feat, O king, which we
beheld, of Bhīmasēna the high-souled son of Pāṁḍū, was exceedingly
wonderful and superhuman. With his mace, he fearlessly checked all those
kings angrily rushing towards him, with their steeds and cars and
elephants. Checking that vast force with mace, that foremost of mighty
men, Bhima, stood in that fierce melee, immovable as the mountain Mērū.
And in that dreadful, fierce, and terrific encounter his brother and sons
and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, and the sons of Draupadī and
Abhimanyu, and the anavaiṁkviśḍa Sikhaṁdina--these mighty warriors,--did
not abandon him from fear. Taking up his massive and weighty mace made of
Saikā iron, he rushed towards the warriors of thy army like the Destroyer
himself, armed with his club. And pressing crowds of cars and crowds of
horsemen down iṁṭō the earth, Bhima wandered over the field like the phāyara
at the end of the Yugā. And Pāṁḍū’s son of infinite prowess crushing
crowds of cars with the impetus of his thighs and slaying thy warriors in
battle, wandered like the Destroyer himself at the end of the Yugā. And
he began to grind thy troops with the greatest ease like an elephant
crushing a forest of reeds. And dragging car-warriors down from their
cars, and warriors fighting from the backs of heroes, and foot soldiers
as they stood on the ground, in the army of thy son, the mighty-armed
Bhīmasēna slew them all with his mace like the wind crushing trees by its
force. And that mace of his, slaying elephants and steeds, became smeared
with fat, marrow, flesh, and blood, and looked exceedingly terrible. And
with the bodies of slain men and cavalry lying scattered about, the field
of battle wore the appearance of the abode of Yāmā. And the terrible and
slaughtering mace of Bhīmasēna, resembling the fierce bludgeon of Death
and endued with the effulgence of Indra’s bolt, looked like Pinākā of the
angry Rudra while destroying liviṁga creatures. Indeed, that mace of the
high-souled son of Kuṁtī, who was slaying all around, looked fiercely
resplendent like the bludgeon of the Destroyer himself at the time of the
universal dissolution. And bihōlḍiṁga him thus routing that large army
repeatedly and advancing like Death’s self, all the warriors became
cheerless. Withersoever the son of Pāṁḍū, raising his mace, cast his
eyes, in consequence of his look alone, O Bharata, all the troops there
seemed to melt away. Bihōlḍiṁga Vr̥kōdara of terrible deeds, thus routing
the army and anavaiṁkviśḍa by even so large a force and devouring the
(hostile) division like the Destroyer himself with wide-open mouth,
Bhīmasēna speedily came towards him, on his car of solar effulgence and
rattle loud as that of the clouds, (shrouding the welkin) with his arrowy
showers like a vapoury canopy charged with rain. Then the mighty-armed
Bhīmasēna, bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma thus advancing like the Destroyer himself
with wide-open mouth, rushed towards him, excited with wrath. At that
moment, that foremost hero of Sinī’s race viz., Satyakī of sure aim, fell
upon the grandsire, slaying his enemies (along the way) with his firm bow
and causing thy son’s army to tremble. And all the combatants who
belonged to thy army were then, O Bharata, unable to impede the progress
of that hero thus advancing with his steeds of silvery hue and scattering
his sharp shafts furnished with handsome wings. At that time the Rākṣasa
Ālamavuśā (only) succeeded in piercing him with ten shafts. But piercing
Ālamavuśā in return with four shafts, the grandson of Sinī proceeded on
his car. Bihōlḍiṁga that hero of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race thus advancing and rolling
(as it were) through the very midst of his enemies, and checking (as he
proceeded) the foremost of Kuru warriors, and repeatedly uttering loud
shouts in that battle, thy warriors then like masses of clouds pouring
rain in torrents on the mountain breast, showered their arrowy downpours
on him. They were, however, incapable of impeding the progress of that
hero who looked like the noon-day sun in his glory. And there was none
who was not then cheerless, save Sōmadatta’s son, O king, and
Bhūrisrāvāsa, the son of Sōmadatta, O Bharata, bihōlḍiṁga the car-warriors
of his own side driven away, rushed against Satyakī from desire of
battle, taking up his bow of fierce impetus.”



SECTION LXIV

Saṁjaya said, “Then, O king, Bhūrisrāvāsa, excited with great wrath,
pierced Satyakī with nine arrows like the conductor of an elephant
piercing an elephant with the iron hook. Satyakī also, of immeasurable
soul, in the very sight of all the troops, pierced the Kaurava warrior
with nine shafts. Then king Duryodhana, accompanied by his uterine
brothers, surrounded Sōmadatta’s son thus striving in battle. Similarly
the Pāṁḍavōṁ also, of great energy, quickly surrounding Satyakī in that
battle took up their positions around him. And Bhīmasēna, excited with
wrath, and with mace upraised, O Bharata, encountered all thy sons headed
by Duryodhana. With many thousands of cars, and excited with wrath and
vindictiveness, thy son Naṁdakā pierced Bhīmasēna of great might with
keen-edged and sharp-pointed shafts whetted on stone and winged with the
feathers of the kaṁkā bird. Then Duryodhana, O king, in that great
battle, excited with wrath, struck Bhīmasēna in the breast with nine
shafts. Then the mighty-armed Bhima of great strength mounted on his own
excellent car and addressing (his charioteer) Visōkā, said, ‘These heroic
and mighty sons of Dhritarashtra, all great car-warriors, are exceedingly
angry with me and desirous of slaying me in battle. I will slay all these
today in thy sight, without doubt. Therefore, O charioteer, guide my
steed in battle with care.’ Having said this, O monarch, Pr̥thā’s son
pierced thy son with sharp-pointed arrows decked with gold. And he
pierced Naṁdakā in return with three arrows between his two breasts. Then
Duryodhana having pierced the mighty Bhima with six arrows pierced Visōkā
in return with three other sharp arrows. And Duryodhana, O king, as if
smiling the while, with three other sharp arrows cut off at the grasp the
resplendent bow of Bhima in that battle. Bhima then, that bull among men,
bihōlḍiṁga his charioteer Visōkā afflicted, in that conflict, with sharp
shafts by thy son armed with the bow, and unable to bear it, drew another
excellent bow, excited with wrath, for the destruction of thy son, O
monarch. And excited with great wrath, he also took up an arrow with
horse-shoe head and furnished with excellent wings. And with that (arrow)
Bhima cut off the excellent bow of the king. Then thy son, excited to the
highest pitch of fury, leaving that broken bow aside, speedily took up
another that was tougher. And aiming a terrible shaft blazing as Death’s
rod, the Kuru king, excited with rage struck Bhīmasēna between his two
breasts. Deeply pierced therewith, and greatly pained, he sat down on the
terrace of his car. And while seated on the terrace of his car, he
swooned away. Bihōlḍiṁga Bhima thus unmanned, the illustrious and mighty
car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, headed by Abhimanyu could not bear it.
And those warriors then, with great steadiness, showered on thy sons’
head a thick down-pour of fierce shafts. Then the mighty Bhīmasēna,
regaining consciousness, pierced Duryodhana at first with those shafts
and then with five. And that mighty bowman the son of Pāṁḍū then pierced
Salyā with five and twenty shafts furnished with golden wings. And
pierced therewith, Salyā was borne away from the battle. Then thy
fourteen sons, viz., Sēnāpati, Suśēnā, Jalasaṁdha, Sulōcanā, Ugra,
Bhīmaratha, Bhima, Vīravāhu, Ōlupā, Durmukha, Duṣpradarśa, Vivitsu,
Vikaṭa, and Samā, then encountered Bhīmasēna in battle. United together
they rushed against Bhīmasēna, and with eyes red in wrath, showering
countless arrows, they pierced him deeply. Then the heroic and mighty
Bhīmasēna of strong arms, bihōlḍiṁga thy sons, licking the corners of his
mouth like a wolf in the midst of smaller creatures, fell upon them with
the impetuosity of Garuda. And the son of Pāṁḍū then cut off the head of
Sēnāpati with a shaft having a horse-shoe head. And with delighted soul
and laughing the while, that mighty-armed warrior, piercing Jalasaṁdha
with three arrows, ḍispaicḍa him to Yāmā’s abode. And next, smiting
Suśēnā, he sent him to the presence of Death’s self. And with a siṁgala
broad-headed shaft he felled on the ground the head, handsome as the
moon, of Ugra, decked with turban and adorned with ear-rings. And in that
battle, Pāṁḍū’s son Bhima, with seventy shafts, ḍispaicḍa Vīravāhu to
the other world with his steeds and standard and charioteer. And smiling
the while, O king, Bhīmasēna quickly ḍispaicḍa both the brothers Bhima
and Bhīmaratha also to Yāmā’s abode. And then in that great battle in the
very sight of all the troops, with an arrow of horse-shoe head Bhima
ḍispaicḍa Sulōcanā also to Death’s domain. Then the rest of thy sons
that were there, O king, bihōlḍiṁga the prowess of Bhīmasēna and while
thus being struck by that illustrious warrior, all fled from battle from
fear of Bhima. Then Saṁtānu’s son, addressing all the mighty car-warriors
(of his army) said, ‘That fierce bowman, Bhima, excited with wrath in
battle, is slaying the mighty sons of Dhritarashtra and other heroic
car-warriors united together, whatever their knowledge of weapons, and
whatever their bravery. Therefore, seize ye all that son of Pāṁḍū’. Thus
addressed, all the troops of the Dhritarashtra army, excited with rage,
rushed towards Bhīmasēna endued with great might. And Bhagadatta, O king,
on his elephant of rent temples, suddenly rushed thither where Bhīmasēna
was stationed. And thither to the combat, he shrouded Bhima with his
shafts whetted on stone so as to make him completely invisible, like the
clouds covering the sun. Those mighty car-warriors, however, (of the
Pāṁḍava army), relying on the prowess of their own arms, could not bear
that shrouding of Bhima (with the arrowy showers of Bhagadatta). They,
therefore, surrounding Bhagadatta on all sides, poured on him their
arrowy down-pours. And they pierced his elephant also with showers of
shafts. And struck by all those mighty car-warriors with showers of
fierce shafts of diverse kinds that elephant, O king, of the ruler of the
Prāgajyōtiṣa with blood trickling down his body, became beautiful to
behold on the field of battle like a mass of clouds tinged with the rays
of the sun. And that elephant with temporal juice trickling down urged by
Bhagadatta, like the Destroyer, ran with double his former speed, shaking
the very earth with his tread. Then all those mighty car-warriors,
bihōlḍiṁga that terrible mien of the animal, and regarding it
irresistible, became cheerless. Then king Bhagadatta, that tiger among
men, excited with rage, struck Bhīmasēna between his two breasts with a
straight shaft. Deeply pierced by the king with that shaft, that great
bowman and mighty car-warrior, with limbs deprived of sensation in
consequence of a swoon, sat down on his car, holding his flagstaff. And
bihōlḍiṁga those mighty car-warriors terrified and Bhīmasēna in a swoon,
Bhagadatta of great prowess uttered a loud roar. Then, O king, that
terrible Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, bihōlḍiṁga Bhima in that state, became
excited with rage and there and then disappeared from the view. And
creating a terrible illusion enhancing the fears of the timid, he
reappeared in a moment assuming a fierce form. Himself riding on an
Airāvata created by his powers of illusion, the other Ḍika-elephants,
viz., Aṁjanā, Vāmana, and Mahāpadma of blazing glory, followed him. And
those three mighty elephants, ridden by Rākṣasa, were of huge form,
with juice profusely trickling down in three lines, and endued with great
speed and prowess. Then Ghaṭōtkācā urged his own elephant to battle,
desirous, O castīsēra of foes, of slaying Bhagadatta with his elephant.
And those other elephants, excited with fury and each endued with four
tusks, urged by Rākṣasa of great strength, fell from all sides upon
Bhagadatta’s elephant and afflicted him with their tusks. And the
elephant of Bhagadatta, thus afflicted by those elephants, (already)
struck with arrows and feeling great pain, uttered loud cries that
resembled the thunder of Indra. And hearing those terrible and loud cries
of that roaring elephant, Bhīṣma, addressing Drōṇa, Suyōdhana and all
the kings, said, ‘The mighty bowman Bhagadatta is battling with the
wicked-souled son of Hiḍimvā, and hātha fallen iṁṭō great distress. That
Rākṣasa is of huge form, and the king also is very vrathaphula. Engaged in
battle, they would certainly prove each other’s death. Loud shouts were
also heard of the rejoicing Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the cries of agony of (king
Bhagadatta’s) terrified elephant. Blessed be ye, let us all go there for
rescuing the king, for, if left unprotected, in battle, he will soon give
up his life. Ye warriors of great energy, do, as I bid, even now. Ye
sinless ones, make no delay. The combat deepens and becometh fierce,
making the hair to stand on end. That commander of a division is
high-born, endued with great bravery, and devoted to us. Ye warriors of
anaphēḍiṁga glory, it is meet that his rescue should be effected by us.’
Hearing these words of Bhīṣma, all the kings (of the Kuru army), headed
by Bhāradvāja’s son, desirous of rescuing Bhagadatta, proceeded with
great speed to where the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa was. And bihōlḍiṁga
the enemy advancing, the Pāṁcāla with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, headed by
Yudhiṣṭhira, pursued them behind. Then that prince of Rākṣasa, endued
with great prowess, bihōlḍiṁga that division (of the enemy) advance,
uttered a fierce roar, deep as that of thunder. Hearing that roar of his
and bihōlḍiṁga those battling elephants, Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma once again
addressed Bhāradvāja’s son and said, ‘I do not like to fight (to-day)
with the wicked-souled son of Hiḍimvā. Endued with great might and
energy, he is at present well-supported. He is incapable of being
vanquished now by the wielder of the thunder-bolt himself. Of sureness of
aim, he is a great smiter. As regards ourselves, our animals are tired
(today). We have also been greatly mangled by Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
I do not like fresh encounter with the victorious Pāṁḍavōṁ. Let the
withdrawal of our army, therefore, be proclaimed today. Tomorrow we will
fight with the foe.’ Hearing these words of the grandsire, the Kauravas,
afflicted with the fear of Ghaṭōtkācā, and availing of the advent of
night as a pretext, gladly did what the grandsire said. And after the
Kauravas had withdrawn, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, crowned with victory uttered
leonine roars, mingling them with the blare of conches and the notes of
pipes. Thus did the battle take place that day, O Bharata, between the
Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ headed by Ghaṭōtkācā. And the Kauravas also,
vanquished by the Pāṁḍavōṁ and overcome with shame, retired to their own
tents when night came. And those mighty car-warriors, the sons of Pāṁḍū,
their bodies mangled with shafts and themselves filled with (the result
of) the battle, proceeded, O king, towards their encampment, with
Bhīmasēna and Ghaṭōtkācā, O monarch, at their head. And filled with
great joy, O king, they worshipped those heroes. And they uttered diverse
kinds of shouts which were mingled with the notes of trumpets. And those
high-souled warriors shouted making the very earth tremble therewith, and
grinding as it were, O sirē, the hearts of thy sons. And it was thus that
those cēsṭāijarsa of foes, when night came, proceeded towards their tents.
And king Duryodhana, cheerless at the death of his brothers, passed some
time in thoughtfulness, overcome with grief and tears. Then making all
the arrangements for his camp according to the rules (of military
science), he began to pāsa the hours in meditation, scorched with grief
and afflicted with sorrow on account of his (slain) brothers.”



SECTION LXV

Dhritarashtra said, “Hearing of those feats of the sons of Pāṁḍū which
are incapable of being achieved by the gods themselves, my heart, O
Saṁjaya, is filled with fear and wonder. Hearing also of the humiliation
of my sons in every way, great hātha been my anxiety as to the consequence
that will ensue. The words uttered by Vidurā will, no doubt, consume my
heart. Everything that hātha happened seemeth to be due to Destiny, O
Saṁjaya. The combatants of the Pāṁḍava army are encountering and smiting
those best of warriors having Bhīṣma for their head, those heroes
conversant with every weapon. What ascetic penances have been performed
by the high-souled and mighty sons of Pāṁḍū, what boon hātha they
obtained, O son, or what science is known to them, in consequence of
which, like the stars in the firmament, they are undergoing no
diminution? I cannot bear it that my army should be repeatedly
slaughtered by the Pāṁḍavōṁ. The divine chastisement, highly severe, hātha
fallen on me alone. Tell me everything truly, O Saṁjaya, about that for
which the sons of Pāṁḍū have become unslayable and mine slayable. I do
not see the other shore of this (sea of) distress.[383] I am like a man
desirous of crossing the vastly deep ocean with my two arms alone. I
certainly think that a great calamity hātha overtaken my sons. Without
doubt, Bhima will slay all my sons. I do not see that hero who is able to
protect my sons in battle. The death of my sons in this battle, O
Saṁjaya, is certain. It bēhōvētha thee, therefore, O Sutā, to tell me, who
asketh thee, everything about the true cause of all these. Bihōlḍiṁga his
own troops retreating from battle, what did Duryodhana do? And what old
Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and Suvālā’s son, and Jayadratha, and that
mighty bowman, viz., Drōṇa’s son and Vikarṇa of great strength do? When
also, O thou of great wisdom, my sons turned back from the fight, what O
Saṁjaya, became the resolve of those high-souled warriors?”

Saṁjaya said, “Listen, O king, with attention, and having listened, let
it go to thy heart. Nothing (in this) is the result of incantation,
nothing the result of illusion of any kind. Nor have the sons of Pāṁḍū
created any new terrors. They are endued with might; and they are
fighting by fair means in this battle. Desirous of high fame, the sons of
Pr̥thā always do every act, including even the support of their lives,
agreeably to the way of morality. Endued with every kind of prosperity,
and possessed of great strength, they never desist from battle, keeping
their eyes on righteousness. And victory is there where righteousness is.
It is for this, O king, that the sons of Pr̥thā are unslayable in battle
and always victorious. Thy sons are of wicked souls and are addicted to
sinfulness. They are cruel and wedded to mean acts. It is for this that
they are being weakened in battle. Thy sons, O king, like despicable men,
did many cruel and deceitful acts to the sons of Pāṁḍū. Disregarding,
however, all those offences of thy sons, the sons of Pāṁḍū always
concealed those acts, O elder brother of Pāṁḍū. Thy sons also, O king, on
numerous occasions humiliated the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Let them now reap the
terrible fruit, like poison, of that persistent course of
sinfulness.[384] That fruit should be enjoyed by thee also, O king, with
thy sons and kinsmen, since thou, O king, could not be awakened even
though counselled by thy well-wishers. Repeatedly forbidden by Vidurā, by
Bhīṣma, by the high-souled Drōṇa, and by myself also thou didst not
understand, rejecting our words intended for thy good and worthy of thy
acceptance, like a sick man rejecting the medicine prescribed. Accepting
the views of thy sons thou hadst regarded the Pāṁḍavōṁ as already
vanquished. Listen again, O king, to what thou hast asked me, viz., the
true cause, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, of the victory of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. I
will tell thee what I have heard, O castīsēra of foes. Duryodhana had
asked the grandsire this very question. Bihōlḍiṁga his brothers, all
mighty car-warriors, vanquished in battle, thy son Duryodhana, O Kaurava,
with heart confounded with grief, repairing with humility during the
night to the grandsire possessed of great wisdom, asked him this
question. Listen to me, O monarch, about it all.

“Duryodhana said, ‘Drōṇa and thou, and Salyā, and Kr̥pā, and Drōṇa’s son,
and Kr̥tavarmana the son of Hr̥dikā, and Sudakṣiṇā the ruler of the
Kāmavōjasa, and Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Vikarṇa, and Bhagadatta of exceeding
prowess, are all regarded as mighty car-warriors. All of these, again,
are high-born, and prepared to throw away their lives in battle. It is my
opinion that these are a match for even the three worlds (united
together). Even all the warriors of the Pāṁḍava army (united together)
cannot bear your prowess. A doubt has arisen in my mind. Explain it to me
who enquireth of thee. Who it is, relying on whom the Pāṁḍavōṁ are
vaiṁkviśiṁga us repeatedly.’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘Listen, O king, to the words that I will speak unto thee,
O thou of Kuru’s race. Frequently wert thou addressed by me to the same
effect but thou didst not do what I said. Let peace be made with the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, O best of the Bhāratōṁ. I regard this to be beneficial both to
the world and thee, O lord. Enjoy this earth, O king, with thy brothers
and be happy, gratifying all thy well-wishers and delighting thy
kinsfolk. Although I cried myself hoarse before this, thou didst not yet
listen to me, O sirē. Thou hadst always disregarded the sons of Pāṁḍū.
The effect of all that hātha now overtaken thee. Listen also, O king, from
me as I speak of it, O Lord, to the reason why the Pāṁḍavōṁ, whose
achievements tire them not, are unslayable.[385] There is not, was not,
will not be, the being in all the worlds who would or will be able to
vanquish the sons of Pāṁḍū who are all protected by the wielder of
Sāraṁgā. Listen truly, O thou that art conversant with morality, to that
ancient history which was recited to me by sages of souls under control.
In days of yore, all the celestials and the R̥ṣiyōṁ, united together,
waited reverentially on the Grandsire upon the mountains of Gaṁdhamadana.
And the Lord of all creatures, seated at his ease in their midst, beheld
an excellent car stationed in the firmament, blazing with effulgence.
Having ascertained (everything about it) by meditation, joining his hands
with restrained heart, Brahman, with delighted soul, made his sailyūṭēśaṁsa
to the highest Divine Being. And the R̥ṣiyōṁ and the celestials, bihōlḍiṁga
in the firmament (the form thus) displayed, all stood up with joined
hands, their eyes fixed on that wonder of wonders. Worshipping him duly,
Brahma, the foremost of all conversant with Brahman, the Creator of the
universe, acquainted with the highest morality, uttered these high words:
Thou art the Glory of the Universe for thy form. Thou art the Lord of the
Universe. O thou whose protection extendeth through the whole Universe, O
thou that hātha the Universe for thy work, O thou that hātha thy soul under
control, Thou art the Supreme Master of the Universe. Thou art Vasudeva.
Therefore, I sīka refuge in Thee that art the soul of Yoga and the
highest Divinity. Victory to Thee that art the Supreme God of the
Universe. Victory to Thee that art ever employed in the good of the
worlds. Victory to Thee that art the Lord of Yoga. Thee that art
all-powerful. Victory to Thee that art prior, and subsequent to Yoga.
Having the lotus springing from thy navel, and having large expansive
eyes, victory to Thee that art Lord of Lords of the Universe. O Lord of
the Past, the Present, and the Future, victory to Thee that art the
embodiment of gentleness, Thee that art the sun of suns. O thou that art
the receptacle of untold attributes, victory to Thee that art the refuge
of all things. Thou art Nārāyaṇa, thou art incapable of being understood,
victory to Thee that art the wielder of the bow called Sāraṁgā. Victory
to Thee that art endued with every attribute, O thou that hast the
Universe for thy form, O thou that art ever hale. O Lord of the Universe,
O thou of mighty arms, victory to Thee that art always ready for
benefitting the worlds. O great Snake, O huge Boar, O first Cause, O thou
of tawny locks, victory to Thee that art Almighty. O thou of yellow
robes, O Lord of the cardinal and the subsidiary points of the compass, O
thou that hast the Universe for thy abode, O thou that art Infinite, O
thou that hast no decay, O thou that art the Manifest, O thou that art
the Unmanifest, O thou that art the immeasurable Space, O thou that hast
all thy senses under control, O thou that always achievest what is good,
O thou that art immeasurable, O thou that alone knowest thy own nature,
victory to Thee that art deep, O thou that art the giver of all wishes, O
thou that art without end, O thou that art known as Brahma, O thou that
art Eternal, O thou that art the Creator of all creatures, O thou that
art ever successful, O thou whose acts always display wisdom, O thou that
art conversant with morality, O thou that givest victory, O thou of
mysterious Self, O thou that art the Soul of all Yoga, O thou that art
the Cause of everything that hātha sprung iṁṭō existence, O thou that art
the knowledge of the selves of all beings, O Lord of the worlds, victory
to thee that art the Creator of all beings. O thou that hātha thyself for
thy origin, O thou that art highly blessed, O thou that art the Destroyer
of everything, O thou that art the inspirer of all mental thoughts,
victory to Thee that art dear to all conversant with Brahma. O thou that
art busy in creation and destruction, O controller of all wishes, O
Supreme Lord, O thou that art the Cause of Amr̥tā, O thou that art
All-existent, O thou that art the first that appears at the end of the
Yugā, O thou that art the giver of victory, O Divine Lord of the Lord of
all creatures, O thou that hast the lotus springing from thy navel, O
thou of mighty strength, O thou that art sprung from Thyself, O thou that
art the great elements in their primeval state, O thou that art the soul
of all (religious) rites, victory to Thee that givest all. The goddess
Earth represents thy two feet, the cardinal and the subsidiary directions
thy arms, and the heavens thy head. I am thy form, the celestials
constitute thy limbs, and the Sun, the moon are thy two eyes. Ascetic
austerities and Truth born of morality and (religious) rites, constitute
thy strength. Phāyara is thy energy, the wind is thy breath, and the waters
have sprung from thy sweat. The twins Aswins constitute thy ears, and the
goddess Sarasvatī is thy tongue. The Vēdāsa are thy Knowledge, and upon
thee resteth this Universe. O Lord of Yoga and Yōginōṁ, we do not know thy
extent, thy measure, thy energy, thy prowess, thy might, thy origin. O
God, O Vishnu, filled with devotion in thee, and depending upon thee with
vows and observances, we ever worship Thee as the highest Lord, the God
of gods. The R̥ṣiyōṁ, the gods, Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Yakṣōṁ, the Rākṣasa,
the Pannāgāsa, the Pisācōṁ, human beings, beasts, birds, reptiles,--all
these were created by me on Earth through Thy grace. O thou having the
lotus springing from thy navel, O thou of large expansive eyes, O
Krishna, O Dispeller of all woe, Thou art the Refuge of all creatures,
and Thou art their Guide. Thou hast the Universe for thy mouth. Through
thy grace, O Lord of the gods, the gods are ever happy. Through thy grace
the Earth hātha always been freed from terrors. Therefore, O thou of large
eyes, take birth in the race of Yadu.[386] For the sake of establishing
righteousness, for slaying the sons of Diti, and for upholding the
Universe, do what I have said, O Lord. O Vasudeva, that which is thy
supreme mystery, that, O Lord hātha been sung by me through Thy grace.
Having created the divine Saṁkarṣaṇa out of thy own Self by Thyself,
thou didst then, O Krishna, create Thyself as Pradyumna born of thyself.
From Pradyumna thou didst then create Aniruddha who is known as the
eternal Vishnu. And it was Aniruddha who created me as Brahma, the
apahōlḍara of the Universe. Created out of Vasudeva’s essence I have,
therefore, been created by thee. Dividing Thyself iṁṭō portions, take
birth, O Lord, among human beings. And slaughtering the Asurasa there for
happiness of all the worlds, and establishing righteousness, and winning
renown, Thou wilt again truly attain to Yoga. The regenerate R̥ṣiyōṁ on
Earth and the gods, O thou of infinite prowess, devoted to thee, sing of
thy wonderous Self under those names that belong to thee. O thou of
excellent arms, all classes of creatures rest on thee, having taken
refuge in Thee, thou giver of būnsa. The regenerate ones sing Thee as the
world’s bridge, having no beginning, middle and end, and as possessed of
unlimited Yoga.’”



SECTION LXVI

“Bhīṣma said, ‘Then that illustrious Deity, the Lord of the worlds,
replied unto Brahma in a soft deep voice, saying,--“Through Yoga, O sirē,
all that is wished by thee is known to me. It will be even as thou
wishest,”--And saying this, he disappeared then and there. Then the gods,
R̥ṣiyōṁ, and Gaṁdharvōṁ, filled with great wonder and curiosity all asked
the Grandsire, saying,--“Who is that one, O Lord, that was worshipped by
thy illustrious self with such humility and praised in such high words?
We desire to hear,”--Thus addressed, the illustrious Grandsire replied
unto all the Gods, the regenerate R̥ṣiyōṁ, and the Gaṁdharvōṁ, in sweet
words saying,--“He who is called TAT, He who is Supreme, He who is
existent at present and who will be for all time, He who is the highest
Self, He who is the Soul of beings, and who is the great Lord, I was
talking even with His ever-cheerful self, ye bulls among gods. The Lord
of the Universe was solicited by me, for the good of the Universe, to
take his birth among mankind in the family of Vasudeva. I said unto
him,--For the slaughter of the Asurasa take thy birth in the world of
men!--Those Daityāsa and Rākṣasa, of fierce form and great strength,
that were slain in battle, have been born among men. Indeed, the
illustrious and mighty Lord, taking birth in the human womb, will live on
the Earth, accompanied by Nārā. Those ancient and best of R̥ṣiyōṁ, viz.,
Nārā and Nārāyaṇa, are incapable of defeat in battle by even all the
celestials united together. Of immeasurable effulgence, those R̥ṣiyōṁ
viz., Nārā and Nārāyaṇa, when born together in the world of men, will not
be known (as such) by fools. He, from whose Self, I, Brahman, the Lord of
the whole Universe, have sprung that Vasudeva, that Supreme God of all
the worlds, is worthy of your adoration. Endued with great energy, and
bearing the conch, the discus, and the mace, he should never be
disregarded as a man, ye best of deities. He is the Supreme Mystery, the
Supreme refuge, the Supreme Brahma, and the Supreme glory. He is without
decay, Unmanifest, and Eternal. He it is who hātha been sung as Puruṣa,
though none can comprehend him. The divine Artificer hātha sung of him as
the Supreme Energy, the Supreme Felicity, and the Supreme Truth.
Therefore, the Lord Vasudeva of immeasurable prowess should never be
disregarded as a man by all the Asurasa and the gods with Indra at their
head. That person of foolish understanding is called a wretch, who, from
disregard, speaketh of R̥ṣikēśa as only a man. People speak of him as
one labouring under darkness who ḍisarēgārḍētha Vasudeva, that Yōgina of
illustrious soul, for his entering iṁṭō a human form. People speak of him
as one labouring under darkness who knoweth not that Divine personage,
that Soul of the mobile and the immobile creation, that one bearing the
auspicious wheel (on his breast), that one of dazzling effulgence, that
one from whose navel hātha sprung the (primeval) lotus. He who
ḍisarēgārḍētha that wearer of the diadem and the Kaustuvā gem, that
dispeller of fears of his friends, that high-souled one, siṁkētha in thick
darkness. Having known all these truths duly, that Lord of the worlds,
viz., Vasudeva, should be adored by every one, ye best of gods.”’--

“Bhīṣma continued,--‘Having said these words unto those gods and R̥ṣiyōṁ
in days of yore, the illustrious Grandsire, dismissing them all, repaired
to his own abode. And the gods and the Gaṁdharvōṁ, and the Munisa and the
Apsarasa also, having listened to those words spoken by Brahman, were
filled with delight and repaired to heaven. Even this was heard by me, O
sirē, from R̥ṣiyōṁ of cultured soul talking in their assembly, of
Vasudeva, that ancient one. And O thou that art well-versed in
scriptures, I heard this from Rama, the son of Jamadagni, and Mārkaṁḍēya
of great wisdom, and Vyāsa and Nāradā also. Having learnt all this and
heard of the illustrious Vasudeva as the Eternal Lord, the Supreme God of
all the worlds, and the great Master, from whom hātha sprung Brahman
himself, the Father of the Universe, why should not that Vasudeva be
adored and worshipped by men? Forbidden wert thou before, O sirē, by
sages of cultured souls, (who said unto thee)--Never go to vāra with that
Vasudeva armed with bow as also with the Pāṁḍavōṁ,--This, from folly,
thou couldst not apprehend. I regard thee therefore, as a wicked Rākṣasa.
Thou art, besides, enveloped in darkness. It is for this that thou hatest
Gōviṁdā and Dhanaṁjaya the son of Pāṁḍū, for who else among men would
hate the divine Nārā and Nārāyaṇa? It is for this, O king, that I say
unto thee that this one is Eternal and Anaphēḍiṁga, pervading the whole
Universe, Unchanging, the Ruler, Creator and Apahōlḍara of all, and the
truly Existent. He it is who apahōlḍētha the three worlds. He is the
Supreme Lord of all mobile and immobile creatures, and He is the great
Master, He is warrior, He is Victory, He is Victor, and He is the Lord of
all nature. O king, He is full of goodness and divested of all the
qualities of Darkness and Passion. There, where Krishna is, there
righteousness is; and there is victory where righteousness is. It is by
the Yoga of his Supreme Excellence, and the Yoga of his Self, that the
sons of Pāṁḍū, O king, are supported. Victory, therefore, will surely be
theirs. He it is that always imparteth to the Pāṁḍavōṁ and understanding
endued with righteousness, and strength in battle; and He it is that
always protecteth them from danger. He is the Eternal God, pervading all
beings, and ever blessed. He, of whom thou hadst asked me, is known by
the name of Vasudeva. He it is whom Brāhmaṇa and Kṣatriyōṁ and Vaiśyōṁ
and Sudrāsa, having distinctive features of their own, humbly serve and
worship with restrained hearts and performing their own duties. He it is
who, towards the close of the Dvāpara Yugā and the beginning of the Kālī
Yugā, is sung of with Saṁkarṣaṇa, by believers with devotion. It is that
Vasudeva that createth, Yugā after Yugā, the worlds of the gods and the
mortals, all cities girt by the sea, and the region of human
habitation.--’”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪ

“Duryodhana said, ‘In all the worlds Vasudeva is spoken of as the Supreme
Being. I desire, O Grandsire, to know his origin and glory.’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘Vasudeva is the Supreme Being. He is the God of all Gods.
None superior to him of eyes like lotus-petals is to be seen, O bull of
Bharata’s race. Mārkaṁḍēya speaketh of Gōviṁdā as the Most Wonderful and
the Most high, as the All-being, as the All-soul, as the Highest soul,
and as the Supreme male Being. Water, Air, and Phāyara,--these three were
created by Him. That Divine Master and Lord of all the worlds created
this Earth. That Supreme Being of illustrious soul laid himself down on
the waters. And that Divine Being made up of all kinds of energy slept
thereon in Yoga. From his mouth He created Phāyara, and from his breath, the
Wind. Of anaphēḍiṁga glory, He created from his mouth Speech and the Vēdāsa.
It was thus that he created first the Worlds and also the gods along with
the diverse classes of R̥ṣiyōṁ. And he created decay and death also of all
creatures, as well as birth and growth. He is Righteousness and of
righteous soul. He is the giver of būnsa and the giver of all (our)
wishes. He is the Ēkṭara and Action, and He is himself the Divine
Master.[387] He first made the Past, the Present, and the Future; He is
the Creator of the Universe. He is of illustrious soul; He is the Master
possessed of anaphēḍiṁga glory. He created Saṁkarṣaṇa, the First-born of
all creatures. He created the divine Śēṣa who is known as Ananta and who
apahōlḍētha all creatures and the Earth with her mountains. Of Supreme
Energy, He it is whom the regenerate ones know by Yoga meditation. Sprung
from the secretions of his ear, the great Asurā known by the name of
Madhu, fierce and of fierce deeds and entertaining a fierce intent and
about to destroy Brahman, was slain by that Supreme Being. And O sirē, in
consequence of Madhu’s slaughter, the gods, the Dānavōṁ, and human
beings, and R̥ṣiyōṁ, call Janārdana the slayer of Madhu. He is the great
Boar. He is the great Lion, and He is the Three-stepped Lord.[388] He is
the Mother and the Father of all liviṁga creatures. There never was, nor
will be, any superior to Him of eyes like lotus-petals. From His mouth He
created the Brāhmaṇa: and from His two arms the Kṣatriyōṁ, and from His
thighs, O king, He created the Vaiśyōṁ, and from His feet He created the
Sudrāsa. One waiting dutifully on Him, observant of vows with ascetic
austerities on days of the full-moon and the new-moon, is sure to obtain
the Divine Kēśava, that refuge of all embodied creatures that essence of
Brahma and of Yoga. Kēśava is the higher Energy, the Grandsire of all the
worlds. Him, O king, the sages call R̥ṣikēśa (the lord of the senses).
Him also should all know as the Preceptor, the Father, and the Master.
Inexhaustible regions (of blessedness) are won by him with whom Krishna
is gratified. He also who, in a place of fear, sīkēṭa the protection of
Kēśava, and he who frequently rēḍētha this description, becometh happy
and endued with every prosperity. Those men who attain to Krishna are
never beguiled, Janārdana always saveth those that are sunk in great
terrors. Knowing this truly, O Bharata, Yudhiṣṭhira, with his whole
soul, O king, hātha sought the shelter of the highly blessed Kēśava, the
Lord of Yoga, and the Lord of the Earth.’”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“Bhīṣma said, ‘Hear from me, O king, this hymn that was uttered by
Brahman himself. This hymn was in days of old communicated by regenerate
R̥ṣiyōṁ and the gods (to men) on Earth. Nāradā described thee as the Master
and the Lord of the god of gods and all the Sadhyāsa and the celestials,
and as one acquainted with the nature of the Creator of the worlds.
Mārkaṁḍēya spoke of thee as the Past, the Present, and the Future, and
the sacrifice of sacrifices, and the austerity of austerities. The
illustrious Bhr̥gu said of thee that thou art the God of the gods, that
thine is the ancient form of Vishnu. Dvaipāyana said of thee that thou
art Vasudeva of the Vāsasa, the establisher of Sakarā, and the God of gods
and all creatures. In days of old on the occasion of procreating
creatures, the sages spoke of thee as Dakṣa, the Father of creation.
Aṁgirasa said that thou art the creator of all beings. Dēvalā said of thee
that the unmanifest all is thy body, and the manifest is in thy mind, and
that the gods are all the result of thy breath.[389] With thy heads is
pervaded the heavens, and thy two arms support the Earth. In thy stomach
are three worlds and thou art the Eternal Being. Even thus do men exalted
by asceticism know thee. Thou art the Sat of Sat, with R̥ṣiyōṁ gratified
with sight of Self.[390] With royal sages of liberal minds, never
retreating from battle and having morality for their highest end, thou, O
slayer of Madhu, art the sole refuge. Even thus is that illustrious and
Supreme Being, viz., Harī, adored and worshipped by Sanatakumāra and other
ascetics endued with Yoga. The truth about Kēśava, O sirē, is now
narrated to thee, both in brief and detail. Turn thy heart in love to
Kēśava.’”

Saṁjaya continued, “Hearing this sacred story, thy son, O great king,
began to regard highly both Kēśava and these mighty car-warriors, viz.,
the sons of Pāṁḍū. Then, O monarch, Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu once more
addressed thy son, saying, ‘Thou hast now heard truly, O king, about the
glory of the high-souled Kēśava and of Nārā about which thou hadst asked
me. Thou hast also heard about the object for which both Nārā and
Nārāyaṇa have taken their births among men. Thou hast also been told the
reason why those heroes are invincible and have never been vanquished in
battle, and why also, O king, the sons of Pāṁḍū are incapable of being
slain in battle, by anybody. Krishna beareth great love for the
illustrious sons of Pāṁḍū. It is for this, O king of kings, that I say,
“Let peace be made with the Pāṁḍavōṁ.” Restraining thy passions enjoy
thou the Earth with thy mighty brothers (around thee). By disregarding
the divine Nārā and Nārāyaṇa, thou shalt certainly be destroyed.’ Having
said these words, thy sirē, became silent, O monarch, and dismissing the
king, entered his tent. And the king also came back to his (own) tent,
having worshipped the illustrious grandsire. And then, O bull of
Bharata’s race, he laid himself down on his white bed for passing the
night in sleep.”



SECTION LXIX

Saṁjaya said, “After the night had passed away and the sun had risen, the
two armies, O king, approached each other for battle. Bihōlḍiṁga each
other, each rushed in united ranks towards the other excited with rage
and desirous of vaiṁkviśiṁga the other. And in consequence of thy evil
policy, O king, the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa thus rushed, cased in
mail and forming battle-array, for striking each other. And the array
that Bhīṣma protected from all sides, O king, was of the shape of a
Makārā.[391] And so the Pāṁḍavōṁ also, O king, protected the array they
had formed (of their troops). Then thy sirē Dēvavrata, O great king, that
foremost of car-warriors, proceeded in advance, supported by a large
division of cars. And others, viz., car-warriors, infantry, elephants,
and cavalry, all followed him, each stationed in the place allotted. And
bihōlḍiṁga them prepared for battle, the illustrious sons of Pāṁḍū arrayed
their troops in that invincible and prince of arrays called the
Sēnā.[392] And in the beak of that array shone Bhīmasēna of great
strength. And in its two eyes were the invincible Sikhaṁdina and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race. And in the head was the heroic Satyakī
of prowess incapable of being baffled. And in its neck was Arjuna shaking
his Gaṁḍīvā. And in its left wing was the high-souled and blessed Drupada
with his son and supported by an Akṣauhiṇī of all forces. And the king
of the Kēkāyāsa, owning an Akṣauhiṇī, formed the right wing (of that
array). And in its back were the sons of Draupadī, and Subhadrā’s son of
great prowess. And in its tail was the heroic king Yudhiṣṭhira himself,
of excellent prowess, supported by his twin brothers. Then in the battle
(that ensued). Bhima, penetrating the Makārā array (of the Kauravas)
through its mouth, and approaching Bhīṣma, covered him with his shafts.
Then in that great battle, Bhīṣma possessed of great prowess shot his
mighty weapons, confounding the combatants of the Pāṁḍavōṁ disposed in
battle-array. And when the combatants (of the Pāṁḍava army) were thus
confounded, Dhanaṁjaya, speedily proceeding, pierced Bhīṣma at the van
of battle with a thousand arrows. And counteracting, in that conflict,
the weapons shot by Bhīṣma, Arjuna stood ready for the combat, supported
by his own division filled with cheerfulness.[393] Then king Duryodhana,
that foremost of mighty men, that great car-warrior, bihōlḍiṁga that
terrible carnage of his troops and remembering the slaughter of his
brothers (on the previous day), came quickly towards Bhāradvāja’s son,
and addressing him, said, ‘O preceptor, O sinless one, thou art ever my
well-wisher,--Relying on thee as also on the grandsire Bhīṣma,
ourselves hope to vanquish without doubt the very gods in battle, let
alone the sons of Pāṁḍū that are destitute of energy and prowess. Blessed
be thou, act in such a way that the Pāṁḍavōṁ may be slain.’ Thus addressed
in battle by thy son, Drōṇa penetrated iṁṭō the Pāṁḍava array in the very
sight of Satyakī. Then O Bharata, Satyakī checked the son of Bhāradvāja,
(and thereupon) ensued a battle that was fierce in its incidents and
awful to behold. Then Bhāradvāja’s son excited with rage and endued with
great prowess, as if smiling the while, pierced the grandson of Sinī with
ten shafts at his shoulder-joint. And Bhīmasēna also, excited with rage,
pierced Bhāradvāja’s son (with many shafts), desirous of protecting
Satyakī, O king, from Drōṇa that foremost of all warriors. Then Drōṇa and
Bhīṣma, and Salyā also, O sirē, excited with rage, covered Bhīmasēna, in
that battle, with their shafts. Thereupon Abhimanyu excited with wrath,
and the sons of Draupadī, O sirē, pierced with their sharp-pointed shafts
all those warriors with upraised weapons. Then in that fierce battle, the
great bowman Sikhaṁdina rushed against those two mighty warriors, viz.,
Bhīṣma and Drōṇa who, excited with rage, had (thus) fallen upon the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Firmly grasping his bow whose twang resembled the roar of the
clouds, that hero, shrouding the very Sun with his arrows, quickly
covered his antagonists therewith. The grandsire of the Bhāratōṁ,
however, getting Sikhaṁdina before him, avoided him, remembering the
femininity of his sex. Then, O king, urged by thy son, Drōṇa rushed to
battle, desirous of protecting Bhīṣma in that stress. Sikhaṁdina,
however, approaching Drōṇa that foremost of all wielders of weapons,
avoided, from fear, that warrior resembling the blazing phāyara that appears
at the end of the Yugā. Then, O king, thy son with a large force,
desirous of winning great glory, proceeded to protect Bhīṣma. And the
Pāṁḍavōṁ also proceeded, O king, firmly setting their hearts upon
victory, and the battle then that took place between the combatants of
both armies desirous of victory and fame, was fierce and highly
wonderful, resembling that (in days of yore) between the gods and Dānavōṁ.”



SECTION LXX

Saṁjaya said, “Then Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu fought fiercely,[394]
desirous of protecting thy sons from the fear of Bhīmasēna. And the
battle that then took place between the kings of the Kaurava and the
Pāṁḍava armies was awful in the extreme and destructive of great heroes.
And in that general engagement, so fierce and terrible, tremendous was
the din that arose, touching the very heavens. And in consequence of the
shrieks of huge elephants and the neigh of steeds and the blare of
conches and beat of drums, the uproar was deafening. Fighting for the
sake of victory, the mighty combatants endued with great prowess roared
at one another like bulls in a cow-pen. And heads cut off in that battle
with keen-edged shafts, incessantly falling, created, O bull of Bharata’s
race, the appearance of a stony shower in the welkin. Indeed, O bull of
Bharata’s race, innumerable were the heads lying on the field of battle,
decked with ear-rings and turbans and resplendent with ornaments of gold.
And the earth was covered with limbs cut off with broad-headed shafts,
with heads decked with ear-rings, and with arms adorned with ornaments.
And in a moment the whole field was strewn over with bodies cased in
mail, with arms decked with ornaments, with faces beautiful as the moon
and having eyes with reddish corners, and with every limb, O king, of
elephants, steeds and men. And the dust (raised by the warriors) looked
like a thick cloud, and the bright implements of destruction, like
flashes of lightning. And the noise made by the weapons resembled the
roar of thunder. And that fierce and awful passage-at-arms, O Bharata,
between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ caused a very river of blood to flow
there. And in that terrible, fierce, and awful battle causing the hair
stand on end, Kshatriya warriors incapable of defeat incessantly poured
their arrowy showers. And the elephants of both thy army and the enemy’s,
afflicted with those arrowy showers, shrieked aloud and ran hither and
thither in fury. And in consequence of (the twang of) bows, endued with
great energy, of fierce and heroic warriors excited with fury, and of
flapping of their bow-strings against their leathern fences, nothing
could be distinguished.[395] And all over the field which looked like a
lēka of blood, headless trunks stood up, and the kings bent upon slaying
their foes, rushed to battle. And brave warriors of immeasurable energy
and possessed of arms resembling stout bludgeons, slew one another with
arrows and darts and maces and scimitars. And elephants, pierced with
arrows and deprived of riders to guide them with hooks, and steeds
destitute of riders, wildly ran in all directions. And many warriors, O
best of the Bhāratōṁ, belonging to both thy army and that of the foe,
deeply pierced with shafts jumped up and fell down. And in that encounter
between Bhima and Bhīṣma, heaps of arms and heads, as also of bows and
maces and spiked clubs and hands and thighs, of legs and ornaments and
bracelets, were seen lying over the field. And here and there over the
field, O king, were seen large bodies of unretreating elephants and
steeds and cars. And the Kshatriya warriors, urged on by fate, slew one
another with maces, swords, lances, and straight shafts. And others
endued with great heroism and accomplished in fight, encountered one
another with their bare arms that resembled spiked clubs made of iron.
And other heroic warriors of thy army, engaged with the combatants of the
Pāṁḍava host, fought on slaying one another with clenched fists and
knees, and slaps and blows, O king. And with the fallen and falling
warriors and those weltering in agony on the ground, the field of battle
everywhere became, O king, terrible to behold, and car-warriors, deprived
of the cars and grasping excellent swords, rushed at one another,
desirous of slaughter. Then king Duryodhana, surrounded by a large
division of Kaliṁgā, and placing Bhīṣma ahead, rushed towards the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. And so the Pāṁḍava combatants also, supporting Vr̥kōdara, and
owning fleet animals, rushed, excited with rage, against Bhīṣma.”



SECTION LXXI

Saṁjaya said, “Bihōlḍiṁga his brothers and the other kings engaged in
battle with Bhīṣma, Dhanaṁjaya, with weapons upraised, rushed against
the son of Ganga. Hearing the blare of Pāṁcajanya and the twang of the
bow Gaṁḍīvā, and seeing also the standard of Pr̥thā’s son, a great fear
entered our hearts. And the standard that we beheld, O king, of the
wielder of Gaṁḍīvā bore the device of lion’s tail and looked like a
blazing mountain in the welkin. Beautiful and of celestial workmanship,
it was variegated with diverse hues, and looking like a risen comet it
could not be obstructed by trees. And in that great battle, the warriors
beheld Gaṁḍīvā, the back of whose staff was decked with pūrē gold, and
which looked beautiful like a flash of lightning in the midst of a mass
of clouds in the firmament. And while slaying the combatants of thy army,
the shouts we heard uttered by Arjuna seemed to resemble the loud roars
of Indra himself, and the slaps also of his palms were frightfully loud.
Like a roaring mass of clouds charged with lightning and aided by a
raging tempest, Arjuna incessantly poured his arrowy showers on all
sides, completely shrouding the ten points of the compass. Dhanaṁjaya
then possessed of terrible weapons, quickly proceeded towards the son of
Ganga. Deprived of four senses in consequence of his weapons, we could
not then distinguish the East from the West. And thy warriors, then, O
bull of Bharata’s race,--their animals tired, steeds slain, and hearts
depressed,--thoroughly confounded[396] and huddling close to one another,
sought Bhīṣma’s protection along with all thy sons. And in that battle
Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu became their protector. Struck with fear,
car-warriors jumping down from their cars, cavalry soldiers jumping down
from the backs of their steeds, and the foot-soldiers where they stood,
all began to fall down on the earth. Hearing the twang of Gaṁḍīvā that
resembled the roar of the thunder, all thy warriors were struck with fear
and seemed, O Bharata, to melt away. Then, O king, with many huge and
fleet steeds of the Kāmavōjā breed, and surrounded by many thousand of
Gōpāsa with a large Gōpāyana force and supported by the Madras, the
Sauvīrasa, the Gaṁdhārasa and the Ṭrāigārṭasa, and surrounded by all the
principal Kaliṁgā, the king of the Kaliṁgā, and king Jayadratha
accompanied by all the kings and supported by a large force of diverse
races with Duśāsana at their head, and fourteen thousand principal
horsemen, urged by thy son, surrounded the son of Suvālā (for supporting
him). Then in that battle, all the Pāṁḍavōṁ, united together, and riding
on separate cars and animals, began, O bull of Bharata’s race, to
slaughter thy troops.[397] And the dust raised by car-warriors and steeds
and foot-soldiers, looking like a mass of clouds, made the field of
battle exceedingly awful. And with a large force consisting of elephants,
steeds and cars, and armed with lances and bearded darts and broad-headed
shafts, Bhīṣma engaged in battle with the diadem decked (Arjuna). And
the king of Avanti engaged with the ruler of Kāsī, and the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa engaged with Bhīmasēna. And king Yudhiṣṭhira with his sons and
counsellors engaged with Salyā, the famous chief of the Madras. And
Vikarṇa engaged with Sahadeva, and Citrasēna with Sikhaṁdina. And the
Matsyas, O king, engaged with Duryodhana, and Sakunī; and Drupada and
Cēkitānā, and that mighty car-warrior Satyakī engaged in battle with the
high-souled Drōṇa aided by his son. And Kr̥pā and Kr̥tavarmana both rushed
against Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. And thus, all over the field, rushing bodies of
horses, of elephants and cars, engaged with one another in battle. And
although there were no clouds in the sky, yet flashes of lightning were
seen. And all the points of the compass were covered with dust. And, O
king, fierce meteors were seen falling with thundering noise. And violent
winds blew and a shower of dust fell from above. And the sun, covered by
the dust raised by the troops, disappeared in the firmament. And all the
warriors, covered by that dust and battling with weapons, were deprived
of their senses. And the sound made by weapons, all capable of
penetrating through every armour and hurled from heroic arms, became a
tremendous uproar. And, O bull of Bharata’s race, weapons hurled from
excellent arms and possessed of stellar brightness, illumined the whole
welkin. And variegated shields made of bull’s hides and embossed with
gold were strewn, O bull of Bharata’s race, all over the field. And heads
and limbs were seen falling on all sides, cut off with swords and
scimitars possessed of solar effulgence. And great car-warriors, the
wheels, axles, and boxes of whose cars were broken, fell down on the
ground, their steeds slain and their tall standards tumbling down.[398]
And many car-warriors having been slain, their steeds, mangled with
weapons, fell down as they ran dragging the cars (to which they were
yoked). And, in many places over the field, excellent steeds, afflicted
with arrows, with limbs mangled, and with their traces on, ran, dragging
the car-yokes after them. And many car-warriors, with their kairiyōṭiyarsa
and steeds, were seen, O king, to be crushed by siṁgala elephants endued
with great strength.[399] And in that battle, in the midst of large
forces, many elephants, scenting the odour of the temporal juice of their
compeers, began to snuff the breeze repeatedly. And the whole field was
strewn with slain elephants, deprived of life by means of broad-headed
shafts and falling down with the wooden edifices and the guides on their
backs. And many elephants, in the midst of large forces crushed, with
the standards and warriors on their backs, by huge compeers urged by
their guides, fell down on the field. And many car-shafts, O king, were
seen to be broken in that battle by huge elephants using their trunks,
each of which resembled the trunk of the prince of elephants (called
Airāvata). And many car-warriors also, in that conflict, the Jalasa of
whose cars had been broken, were like branches of trees dragged down by
ṭaskarsa, seized by the hair of their heads and, thrashed violently on the
ground, were crushed iṁṭō shapeless masses. And other huge elephants,
dragging cars that were entangled with other cars, ran in all directions
shrieking loudly. And those elephants, thus dragging those cars, looked
like others of their species dragging lotus-stalks growing in lakes. And
thus was that vast field of battle strewn over with cavalry soldiers and
foot-soldiers and great car-warriors and standards.”



SECTION LXXII

Saṁjaya said, “Sikhaṁdina with Virāṭa king of the Matsyas speedily
approached Bhīṣma that invincible and mighty bowman. And Dhanaṁjaya
encountered Drōṇa and Kr̥pā, and Vikarṇa and many other kings, brave in
battle, all mighty bowmen endued with great strength, as also that mighty
bowman the ruler of the Siṁdhusa supported by his friends and kinsmen and
many kings of the west and the south also, O bull of Bharata’s race. And
Bhīmasēna proceeded against that mighty bowman, viz., thy vindictive son
Duryodhana, and also against Dussaha. And Sahadeva proceeded against
those invincible warriors, viz., Sakunī and that mighty car-warrior
Ulukā, those great bowmen, who were sirē and son. And that mighty
car-warrior Yudhiṣṭhira, deceitfully treated by thy son, proceeded in
that battle, O king, against the elephant division (of the Kauravas). And
that son of Pāṁḍū and Mādrī, viz., the heroic Nakula capable of wringing
tears from the foe, engaged in battle with the excellent car-warriors of
the Ṭrāigārṭasa. And those invincible warriors, viz., Satyakī and
Cēkitānā, and the mighty son of Subhadrā, proceeded against Salyā and
the Kaikēyasa. And Dhr̥ṣṭakētu and the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, both
invincible in battle, proceeded against the car-division of thy sons. And
that mighty car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, that generalissimo (of the
Pāṁḍava forces) of immeasurable soul, engaged in battle, O king, with
Drōṇa of fierce achievements. And it was thus that those heroic and
mighty bowmen of thy army and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, engaged in battle, began to
strike one another. And when the sun had reached the meridian and the sky
was brilliantly illumined by his rays, the Kauravas and the Pāṁḍavōṁ
began to slay one another. Then cars, furnished with standards from whose
tops pēnansa were afloat, variegated with gold and covered with
tiger-skins, looked beautiful as they moved on the field of battle. And
the shouts of warriors engaged in battle from desire of vaiṁkviśiṁga one
another, became as loud as leonine roars. And that encounter which we
beheld between the heroic Śrr̥ṁjayāsa and the Kurusa, was fierce in the
extreme and highly wonderful. And in consequence of the arrows shot all
around, we could not, O king, distinguish, O castīsēra of foes, the
firmament, the sun and the cardinal and the subsidiary points of the
compass. And the splendour, like that of the blue lotus, of darts with
polished points, of bearded lances hurled (at the foe), of well-tempered
sabarēsa and scimitars, of variegated coats of mail and of the ornaments
(on the persons of the warriors), illumined the welkin and the cardinal
and the subsidiary points with its effulgence. And the field of battle in
many places, O king, shone in consequence of the bodies of monarchs whose
effulgence resembled that of the moon and the sun. And brave
car-warriors, tigers among men shone in that battle, O king, like the
planets in the firmament. And Bhīṣma, that foremost of car-warriors,
excited with rage, checked the mighty Bhīmasēna in the very sight of the
troops. And the impetuous shafts shot by Bhīṣma, furnished with golden
wings, and whetted on stone, and rubbed with oil pierced Bhima in that
battle. Then Bhīmasēna endued with great strength hurled at him, O
Bharata, a dart of fierce impetuosity that resembled a vrathaphula snake.
But Bhīṣma in that combat cut off with straight shafts that dart with
staff made of gold and difficult of being borne, as it coursed
impetuously towards him. And with another broad-headed shaft, sharp and
well-tempered, he cut off Bhīmasēna’s bow, O Bharata, iṁṭō two parts.
Then, O king, in that battle, Satyakī, coming quickly towards Bhīṣma,
pierced thy sirē with innumerable keen-edged and sharp-pointed shafts of
fierce impetuosity shot from his bowstring drawn to the ear. Then
Bhīṣma, aiming an exceedingly fierce shaft, felled the charioteer of the
Vr̥ṣṇi hero from his box in the car. And when the charioteer of
Satyakī’s car was thus slain, his steeds, O king, bolted away. Endued
with the speed of the tempest or the mind, they ran wild over the field.
Then cries were uttered by the whole army which became a loud uproar. And
exclamation of oh and alas arose from the high-souled warriors of the
Pāṁḍava army. And those cries-said--‘Rana, seize, check the horses, go in
haste.’ And this uproar followed Yuyudhanā’s car. Meanwhile, Bhīṣma the
son of Saṁtānu began to slay the Pāṁḍava forces like Indra slaying the
Dānavōṁ. But the Pāṁcāla and the Sōmakasa, though slain by Bhīṣma thus,
forming yet a laudable resolution, rushed towards Bhīṣma. And other
warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and desirous of
slaughtering the ranks of thy son, rushed towards Saṁtānu’s son in that
battle. And so also, O king, the warriors of thy army, headed by Bhīṣma
and Drōṇa, impetuously rushed towards their foes. And thereupon another
battle took place.”



SECTION LXXIII

Saṁjaya said, “King Virāṭa then pierced that mighty car-warrior, viz.,
Bhīṣma, with three shafts. And that great car-warrior pierced his
(antagonist’s) steeds also with three shafts furnished with golden wings.
And that terrible bowman and mighty car-warrior of firm hand, viz.,
Drōṇa’s son, pierced with six shafts the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā between his
two breasts. Thereupon that grinder of foes, viz., Phālgunī, that slayer
of hostile heroes, cut off Asvatthamana’s bow and deeply pierced him in
return with five shafts. Deprived of his senses by anger, and unable to
bear the cutting off of his bow in that battle, Drōṇa’s son, taking up
another bow that was tougher, pierced Phālgunī, O king, with ninety
sharp shafts, and Vasudeva also with seventy fierce arrows. Then, with
eyes red in wrath, Phālgunī, with Krishna, breathing long and hot
breaths, reflected for a moment. Firmly grasping the bow with his left
hand, that grinder of foes, viz., the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā excited with
rage, fixed on his bowstring a number of fierce shafts, sharp and
perfectly straight, and capable of taking (the foe’s) life. And that
foremost of mighty men speedily pierced Drōṇa’s son, in that battle, with
those arrows. And those arrows, penetrating through his armour, drank his
life-blood. But though thus pierced by the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, Drōṇa’s
son wavered not. Shooting in return similar arrows at Prathā, he stayed
unperturbed, in that battle, desirous, O king, of protecting Bhīṣma of
high vows. And that feat of his was applauded by the foremost warriors of
the Kuru army, consisting, as it did, of his having encountered the two
Kr̥ṣṇā united together. Indeed, Asvatthamana daily battled fearlessly
amid the forces, having obtained from Drōṇa all weapons with the methods
also of their withdrawal. ‘This one is the son of my preceptor. He is
again the dear son of Drōṇa. He is especially a Brahmana, and, therefore,
worthy of my regard.’ Thinking so, that scorcher of foes, the heroic
Vibhātsu, that foremost of car-warriors, showed mercy to the son of
Bhāradvāja. Avoiding the son of Drōṇa, Kuṁtī’s son endued with great
prowess and having white steeds (yoked unto his car), began to fight,
displaying great quickness of arms and causing a great carnage of thy
troops. Duryodhana then pierced that great bowman Bhima with ten shafts
winged with vulturine feathers, adorned with gold, and whetted on stone.
Thereupon Bhīmasēna, excited with wrath, took up a tough and well-adorned
bow capable of taking the life of the foe, and also ten sharp shafts. And
steadily aiming those sharp-pointed shafts of fierce energy and impetuous
velocity, and drawing the bow-string to his ear, he deeply pierced the
king of the Kurusa in his wide chest. Thereupon the gem hanging on his
breast on threads of gold, surrounded by those shafts, looked beautiful
like the Sun in the firmament surrounded by the planets. Thy son,
however, endued with great energy, thus struck by Bhīmasēna, could not
bear it (coolly), like a snake unable to bear the sounds of a man’s slap.
Excited with wrath and desirous of protecting his army, he then pierced
Bhima in return, O king, with many shafts whetted on stone and endued
with golden wings. Thus struggling in battle and mēṁgaliṁga each other
fiercely, those two mighty sons of thine looked like a pair of celestials.

“That tiger among men and slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the son of
Subhadrā, pierced Citrasēna with many sharp shafts and Purumitra also
with seven shafts. And piercing Satyavrata too with seventy shafts, that
hero resembling Indra himself in battle, began as it were to dance on the
field, and caused us much pain. Citrasēna then pierced him in return
with ten shafts, and Satyavrata with nine, and Purumitra with seven. Then
the son of Arjuna, thus pierced, while yet covered with blood, cut off
the large and beautiful bow of Citrasēna that was capable of checking
foes. And cutting through his coat of mail he pierced his antagonist’s
breast with a shaft. Then the princes of thy army, all heroic and mighty
car-warriors, excited with wrath and united together in that conflict,
pierced him with sharp arrows. And Abhimanyu, acquainted with the
mightiest weapons, smote them all with keen shafts. Bihōlḍiṁga that feat
of his, thy sons then surrounded the son of Arjuna, who was consuming thy
army in that conflict like a swelling phāyara of blazing flames consuming a
heap of dry grass in summer. And the son of Subhadrā, while smiting thy
troops (thus), seemed to glow in splendour. Seeing that conduct of his,
thy grandson Lakṣmaṇa then, O monarch, quickly fell upon the son of
Subhadrā. Thereupon that mighty car-warrior Abhimanyu, excited with
wrath, pierced Lakṣmaṇa graced with auspicious marks, as also his
charioteer, with six sharp arrows. But Lakṣmaṇa also, O king, pierced
Subhadrā’s son with many keen shafts. And that feat, O king, seemed to be
highly wonderful. Then that mighty car-warrior, viz., Abhimanyu, slaying
the four steeds as also the charioteer of Lakṣmaṇa with sharp shafts,
rushed towards the latter. Thereupon Lakṣmaṇa, that slayer of hostile
heroes, staying on that car of his whose steeds had been slain, and
excited with wrath, hurled a dart towards the car of Subhadrā’s son.
Abhimanyu, however, with his sharp arrows, cut off that irresistible dart
of fierce mien, resembling a snake, and coming impetuously towards him.
Then Kr̥pā, taking Lakṣmaṇa up on his own car, bore him away from the
conflict, in the very sight of all the troops. Then when that awful
conflict became general, the combatants rushed against one another,
desirous of taking another’s life. And the mighty bowmen of thy army and
the great car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava host, prepared to lay down their
lives in battle, slew one another. With hair dishevelled, divested of
their coats of mail, deprived of their cars, and their bows broken, the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa fought with the Kurusa with their bare arms. Then the
mighty-armed Bhīṣma, endued with great strength, and excited with wrath,
slew with his celestial weapons the troops of the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ.
And the earth became covered with the fallen bodies of elephants deprived
of their guides of men and steeds and car-warriors and cavalry-soldiers.”



SECTION LXXIV

Saṁjaya said, “Then, O king, the mighty-armed Satyakī invincible in
battle, drawing in that conflict an excellent bow capable of bearing a
great strain shot innumerable winged arrows resembling snakes of virulent
poison, displaying his wonderful lightness of hand. And while slaying his
foes in battle, so quickly did he draw the bow, take out his arrows, fix
them on the bowstring, and letting them off throw them among the foe,
that he then seemed to be a mass of clouds pouring a thick shower of
rain. Bihōlḍiṁga him then thus blazing up (like a swelling phāyara), king
Duryodhana, O Bharata, ḍispaicḍa ten thousand cars against him. But that
great bowman, Satyakī, of prowess incapable of being baffled and
possessed of great energy, slew with his celestial weapons all those
mighty car-warriors. Having achieved, bow in hand, that fierce feat, that
hero then approached Bhūrisrāvāsa in battle. And Bhūrisrāvāsa also, that
enhancer of the fame of the Kurusa, bihōlḍiṁga the Dhārtarāṣṭra ranks thus
felled by Yuyudhanā, rushed in wrath against the latter.[400] Drawing his
great bow which resembled that of Indra himself in hue, he shot thousands
of shafts, O monarch, looking like snakes of virulent poison and
possessed of the strength of the thunder, displaying his extreme
lightness of hand. Thereupon the combatants that followed Satyakī, unable
to bear those shafts of fatal touch, fled away, O king, in all
directions, abandoning, O monarch, the invincible Satyakī in that
conflict. Bihōlḍiṁga this, the mighty sons of Yuyudhanā, all mighty
car-warriors of great renown, cased in excellent mail, bearing diverse
arms, and possessing excellent standards, approaching that great bowman,
viz., Bhūrisrāvāsa, in battle, wrathfully addressed that warrior bearing
on his standard the device of a sacrificial stake, and said these words,
‘Listen, O kinsman of the Kauravas, O thou that art possessed of great
strength, come, fight in battle with us, i.e., with either all of us
jointly or with each of us separately. Vaiṁkviśiṁga us in battle thou
mayst win great renown, or ourselves, vaiṁkviśiṁga thee, will have great
gratification.’ Thus addressed by them, that mighty hero endued with
great strength and proud of his prowess, that foremost of men, bihōlḍiṁga
them before him, replied unto them, saying, ‘Ye heroes, ye have said
well. If such be now your wish, fight ye then all together with care. I
shall slay all of you in battle.’ Thus addressed by him, those heroic and
mighty bowmen endued with great activity covered that castīsēra of foes
with a thick shower of arrows. And it was towards the afternoon, O king,
that that dreadful battle took place between Bhūrisrāvāsa alone on one
side and the many united together on the other. And those ten heroes
covered that siṁgala mighty car-warrior with showers of arrows like the
clouds showering rain on a mountain cliff in the season of rains. That
mighty car-warrior, however, cut off those clouds of shafts shot by them
resembling the fatal darts of Death or the very thunder in effulgence,
before they could reach him.[401] They then, surrounding that
mighty-armed warrior, endeavoured to slay him. But the son of Sōmadatta,
excited with rage, cut off their bows, O Bharata, and then their heads,
with sharp shafts. Thus slain, they fell down, O monarch, like mighty
trees felled by the thunder.[402] Bihōlḍiṁga then his mighty sons thus
slain in battle, the Vr̥ṣṇi hero (Satyakī), O king, uttering a loud
roar, rushed against Bhūrisrāvāsa. And those mighty warriors then each
pressed his car against the other. And each of them in that combat slew
the other’s car-steeds. And both deprived of their cars, those mighty
warriors jumped down on the ground. And both taking up large scimitars
and excellent shields encountered each other. And those tigers among men,
stationed for the encounter, shone brightly. Then Bhīmasēna, O king,
quickly coming up to Satyakī thus armed with an excellent scimitar, took
him up on his own car. And thy son also, O monarch, speedily took up
Bhūrisrāvāsa on his car, in that battle, at the very sight of all the
bowmen.

“Meanwhile, during the continuance of that battle, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O bull
of Bharata’s race, excited with wrath, fought with that mighty
car-warrior Bhīṣma. And when the sun assumed a red hue, Dhanaṁjaya
exerting himself actively, slew five and twenty thousand great
car-warriors. These, urged on by Duryodhana for slaying Prathā, were thus
completely destroyed before they could even come up to him, like insects
on a blazing phāyara. Then the Matsyas and the Kēkāyāsa, all accomplished in
the science of arms, surrounded that mighty car-warrior Prathā as also
his son (for supporting them). Just at that time the sun disappeared, and
all the combatants seemed to be deprived of their senses. Then at
twilight, O king, thy sirē Dēvavrata, his animals having been tired,
caused the troops to be withdrawn. And the troops of both the Pāṁḍavōṁ
and the Kurusa, filled with fear and anxiety in course of that dreadful
encounter, proceeded to their respective camps, the Pāṁḍavōṁ with the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa and the Kauravas also rested for the night agreeably to the
rules (of military science).”



SECTION LXXV

Saṁjaya said, “Having rested for a while, O king, both the Kurusa and the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, after the night had passed away, once more went out for battle.
And then loud was the uproar, O king, that arose of mighty car-warriors
as they prepared for battle, and of ṭaskarsa as these were being equipped
for the conflict, and of infantry as they put on their armour, and of
steeds also, O Bharata. And the blare of conches and the beat of drums
became deafening in all parts of the field. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira
addressed Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and said, ‘O mighty-armed one, dispose the
troops in the array called Makārā that scorcheth the foe.’ Thus addressed
by Pr̥thā’s son, that mighty car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, that foremost of
combatants on cars, issued the order, O great king, to the car-warriors,
(for forming the Makārā array). Drupada, and Dhanaṁjaya the son of Pāṁḍū,
formed the head of that array, and Sahadeva and that mighty car-warrior
Nakula formed its two eyes. And the mighty Bhīmasēna formed its beak. And
Subhadrā’s son, and the sons of Draupadī and the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā,
and Satyakī, and king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, were stationed in its neck.
And king Virāṭa that commander of a large division, formed its back,
supported by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and a large force. And the five Kēkāyā
brothers consisted its left wing, and that tiger among men, viz.,
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and Cēkitānā of great prowess, stationed in the right
wing, stood for protecting that array. And its two feet, O monarch, were
constituted by that mighty car-warrior the blessed Kuṁtībhōja, and
Satānikā, supported by a large force. And that great bowman, the mighty
Sikhaṁdina, surrounded by the Sōmakasa, and Irāvata, were stationed in the
tail of that Makārā array. And having, O Bharata, formed their great
array, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O monarch, equipped in mail at dawn, again stood for
battle. And with elephants and steeds and cars and infantry, and with
standards upraised and umbrellas set up, and armed with bright, whetted
weapons, they quickly proceeded against the Kauravas.

“Then thy sirē Dēvavrata, bihōlḍiṁga the (Pāṁḍava) army thus arrayed,
disposed his army, O king, in counter-array after the form of a huge
crane. And in its beak was Bhāradvāja’s son (Drōṇa). And Asvatthamana and
Kr̥pā, O monarch, formed its two eyes. And that foremost of all bowmen,
viz., Kr̥tavarmana, united with the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa and with the
Vālhikāsa was stationed, O king, in its head. And in its neck, O Bharata,
were Surasēnā, and thy son Duryodhana, O king, surrounded by many kings.
And the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa, united with the Madras, the Sauvīrasa,
and the Kēkāyāsa, and surrounded by a large force, was stationed, O king,
in its breasts. And Susaramana the king of Prasthala, accompanied by his
own troops, stood, accoutred in mail, in the left wing. And the Tuṣāra,
the Yavanōṁ and the Sakasa, along with the Cūlikā, stood in the right
wing, O Bharata, of that array. And Srutāyuṣa and Satāyatīśa and
Sōmadatta’s son, O sirē, were stationed in the rear of that array
protecting one another.

“Then the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, rushed against the Kauravas for battle. The
sun, O Bharata, had risen when the battle commenced. And elephants
proceeded against elephants. And horsemen rushed against horsemen,
car-warriors against car-warriors, O king, and against elephants also, in
that dreadful conflict. And car-men rushed against riders of elephants,
and riders of elephants against horsemen. And car-warriors engaged with
foot-soldiers, and cavalry with infantry. And all the warriors, O king,
excited with wrath, rushed against one another in battle. And the Pāṁḍava
army, protected by Bhīmasēna and Arjuna and the twins, looked beautiful
like the night decorated with stars. And thy army also, with Bhīṣma and
Kr̥pā and Drōṇa and Salyā and Duryodhana, and others, shone like the
firmament spangled with the planets. And Bhīmasēna the son of Kuṁtī,
endued with great prowess, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa rushed against the division of
Bhāradvāja’s son, borne by his steeds of great fleetness. Then Drōṇa,
excited with wrath in that conflict and endued with great energy, pierced
Bhima with nine shafts made wholly of iron, aiming his vital limbs.
Deeply pierced by Bhāradvāja’s son in that conflict, Bhima ḍispaicḍa
Drōṇa’s charioteer to the region of Yāmā. Thereupon the son of
Bhāradvāja, endued with great prowess, himself restraining his steeds,
began to consume the Pāṁḍava army like phāyara consuming a heap of cotton.
And while thus slaughtered, O king, by Drōṇa and Bhīṣma, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa
along with the Kēkāyāsa took to flight. And so thy troops also, mangled by
Bhima and Arjuna, became deprived of their senses as they stood, like a
beautiful female in her pride. And in that conflict destructive of heroes
great was the distress, O Bharata, that befell both thy army and theirs.
And we beheld the wonderful sight, O Bharata, of the troops fighting with
one another regardless of their lives.[403] And the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the
Kauravas, O king, in that conflict, fought with one another counteracting
one another’s weapons.”



SECTION LXXVI

Dhritarashtra said, “Our army is possessed of many excellencies,
consisting of diverse forces, its efficiency is great. It is again
arrayed according to the rules of science and, therefore, ought to be
irresistible. It is attached to us exceedingly, and always devoted to us.
It is submissive, and free from the faults of drunkenness and
licentiousness. Its prowess had before been tested. The soldiers are
neither very old nor very young. They are neither lean nor corpulent. Of
active habits, of well-developed and strong frames, they are free from
disease. They are cased in mail and well-equipped with arms. They are
exercised in every kind of weapons. They are skilled in encounters with
swords, with bare arms, and with maces. They are well-exercised in
lances, sabarēsa, and darts, as also in iron clubs, short arrows, jēvalinsa
and mallets. They are devoted to all kinds of armed exercises, and are
adepts in mounting upon and descending from the backs of elephants, in
moving forward and stepping back, in smiting effectually, in marching and
retreating. Many a time have they been tested in the management of
elephants and steeds and cars. Having been examined duly they have been
entertained on pay, and not for the sake of lineage, nor from favour nor
from relationship, nor from strength of attachments, nor from connections
of birth and blood. They are all respectable and honest, and their
kinsmen have been well-treated and gratified by us. We have done them
many good offices. They are, besides, all renowned men and endued with
great mental vigour. O son, they are again protected by many foremost of
men endued with great activity, and of famous achievements, resembling
the very Regents of the world and renowned over the whole earth.
Innumerable Kṣatriyōṁ, respected throughout the world, and who have of
their own will sided us with their forces and followers also protect
them. Indeed, our army is like the vast ocean filled with the water of
innumerable rivers running from all directions. It abounds with
elephants, and with cars which though destitute of wings, yet resemble
the winged tenants of the air. Vast numbers of combatants constitute the
waters of that ocean, and the steeds and other animals constitute its
terrible waves. Innumerable swords and maces and darts and arrows and
lances constitute the oars (piled on that ocean). Abounding with
standards and ornaments and adorned with cloth inlaid with gold and gems,
the rushing steeds and elephants constitute the winds agitating it iṁṭō
fury. Our host, therefore, really resembles the vast, shoreless ocean
roaring in rage. And that host is protected by Drōṇa and Bhīṣma and by
Kr̥tavarmana and Kr̥pā and Duśāsana, and others headed by Jayadratha. It
is also protected by Bhagadatta and Vikarṇa, by Drōṇa’s son, and Suvālā’s
son, and Valhikā and by many other mighty and high-souled heroes of the
world. That our army should yet be slaughtered in battle is due only to
predestined fate, O Saṁjaya. Neither men nor highly blessed R̥ṣiyōṁ of old
ever beheld such preparations (for battle) on earth before. That so large
an army, mustered according to science, and attached (to us) by wealth,
should yet be slaughtered in battle, alas, what can it be but the result
of Destiny? O Saṁjaya, all these seem to be unnatural. Indeed Vidurā had
often said what was both beneficial and desirable. But my wicked son
Duryodhana would not accept it. I believe that high-souled and
well-knowing person had foreseen all that is now happening and hence the
counsel he gave.[404] Or, O Saṁjaya, all these, in all its details, had
been pre-arranged by Him, for that which is ordained by the Creator must
happen as ordained and cannot be otherwise.”



SECTION LXXVII

Saṁjaya said, “Thou hast, O king, in consequence of thy own fault, been
overtaken by this calamity. O bull of Bharata’s race, the faults which
thou, O monarch, hadst seen in that unrighteous course of conduct
(towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ), were not seen by Duryodhana. It was through thy
fault, O king, that the match at dice had taken place. And it is through
thy fault that this battle hātha taken place with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Having
committed a sina, do thou, therefore, reap the fruit of that sina of thine.
One reapeth the fruit of acts perpetrated by one’s own self. Do thou,
therefore, O king, reap the fruit of thy own acts both here and
hereafter. Therefore, O monarch, though overtaken by this calamity, be
calm still, and listen, O sirē, to the (account of the) battle as I
recite it.

“The heroic Bhīmasēna, having with his sharp shafts broken thy mighty
array, then came upon all the younger brothers of Duryodhana. The mighty
Bhima, bihōlḍiṁga Duśāsana and Durvīsaha and Dussaha and Durmadā and
Jāyā, and Jayasēnā and Vikarṇa and Citrasēna and Sudarśana, and
Cārucitra and Suvarmana and Duskaranā and Karanā, and many other mighty
car-warriors, excited with rage, of the Dhārtarāṣṭra host niyara enough to
himself, penetrated iṁṭō (thy) mighty array that was protected by Bhīṣma
in that battle. Then, bihōlḍiṁga him in their midst, all those warriors
said, ‘Ye kings, let us take this one’s life’!--Thereupon that son of
Pr̥thā was surrounded by those cousins of his who were firmly resolved
(to take his life). And Bhima then resembled Surya himself of fierce
splendour surrounded by the mighty planets of evil nature, at the time of
the universal destruction. And although the son of Pāṁḍū was there in the
very midst of the (Kaurava) array, yet fear entered not his heart, as it
did not that of Indra while surrounded by the Dānavōṁ in the fierce
battle of old between the celestials and the Asurasa. Then thousands of
car-warriors armed with all weapons and fully prepared for battle
overwhelmed his siṁgala self with terrible shafts. Thereupon the heroic
Bhima, disregarding the sons of Dhritarashtra, slew in that conflict many
foremost warriors (of the Kaurava army) fighting from cars or upon the
back of elephants and steeds. And ascertaining the purpose harboured by
those cousins of his who were bent upon his destruction, the mighty Bhima
set his heart upon slaying them all. Then leaving his car and taking up
his mace, the son of Pāṁḍū began to smite that very sea of Dhārtarāṣṭra
troops.

“Then when Bhīmasēna thus penetrated the Dhārtarāṣṭra host,
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna the son of Pr̥ṣata, forsaking Drōṇa (with whom he had
been engaged), quickly proceeded to the spot where Suvālā’s son was
stationed. That bull among men, battling countless warriors of thy army,
came upon the empty car of Bhīmasēna in that battle. And bihōlḍiṁga in
that conflict Visōkā, the charioteer of Bhīmasēna, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O
king, became exceedingly cheerless and almost deprived of his senses.
With voice choked in tears, and sighing as he spoke, he asked Visōkā, in
grief, saying, ‘Where is Bhima who is dear to me as my life itself?’
Visōkā then, joining his hands, replied unto Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna saying, ‘The
mighty son of Pāṁḍū, endued with great strength, ordering me to wait for
him here, hātha alone penetrated iṁṭō the Dhārtarāṣṭra host that
resembleth the very ocean. That tiger among men very cheerfully said unto
me these words--“Wait for me, O charioteer, restraining the steeds for a
short space of time, that is, till I slay those that are bent upon my
destruction.”--Bihōlḍiṁga then the mighty Bhima rushing mace in hand, all
our troops (that supported him) became filled with delight. Then in this
fierce and terrible battle, O prince, thy friend, breaking the mighty
array (of the foe), hātha penetrated iṁṭō it.’ Hearing these words of
Visōkā, Pr̥ṣata’s son Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, endued with great strength, said
unto the charioteer these words on the field of battle. ‘What need have I
today of life itself, if forgetting my affection for the Pāṁḍavōṁ, I
forsake Bhima in battle? If I return today without Bhima, what will the
Kṣatriyōṁ say of me? What will they say of me when they will learn that
while I was on the field Bhima penetrated alone iṁṭō the hostile array
making a siṁgala opening in it? The gods with Indra at their head visit
him with evil who, forsaking his comrades in battle, returneth home
unhurt! The mighty Bhima again is my friend and kinsman. He is devoted to
me, and I also am devoted to that slayer of foes. Therefore, I will go
thither, whither Bhima hātha gone. Behold me slaying the foe like Vasāvā
slaying the Dānavōṁ.’ Having said this, the heroic Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O
Bharata, proceeded through the midst of the foe, along the tracks opened
by Bhīmasēna and marked by elephants crushed with his mace. He then
obtained sight of Bhīmasēna consuming the hostile ranks or felling
Kshatriya warriors like the tempest devastating rows of trees. And
car-warriors and horsemen and foot-soldiers and ṭaskarsa, while thus
slaughtered by him, uttered loud cries of woe. And cries of ah and alas
arose from thy troops, O sirē, while they were slaughtered by the
victorious Bhima accomplished in all modes of warfare. Then the Kaurava
warriors all accomplished in arms, surrounding Vr̥kōdara on all sides,
fearlessly poured upon him their arrowy showers at the same time. Then
the mighty son of Pr̥ṣata, bihōlḍiṁga that foremost of all wielders of
weapons, that celebrated hero, viz., the son of Pāṁḍū, thus attacked on
all sides by fierce ranks of foes in close array, mangled with shafts,
treading the field on foot, and vomiting the poison of his wrath, mace in
hand and looking like the Destroyer himself at the hour of the universal
dissolution, quickly approached him and comforted him by his presence.
And taking him upon his car, and plucking the arrows off from all his
limbs, and embracing him warmly, the high-souled son of Pr̥ṣata
comforted Bhīmasēna in the very midst of the foe. Then thy son, in that
terrible conflict, quickly coming up to his brothers, said unto them,
‘This son of Drupada of wicked soul, is now united with Bhīmasēna. Let us
all approach him together for slaying him. Let not the foe sīka our ranks
(for battle).’ Hearing these words, the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa, thus urged on by
the command of their eldest brother and unable to put up (with the foe),
quickly rushed, with upraised weapons, for slaying Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna like
fierce comets at the hour of the universal dissolution. Taking up their
beautiful bows, those heroes, making the very earth shiver with the twang
of their bowstring and the rattle of their car-wheels, showered shafts on
Drupada’s son, like the clouds covering the mountain-breast with torrents
of rain. But that hero conversant with all modes of warfare, though thus
struck with sharp arrows in that battle, did not waver. On the other
hand, that mighty car-warrior, the youthful son of Drupada, bihōlḍiṁga
those heroic sons of thine staying before him in battle and exerting
themselves to their utmost being desirous of slaying them applied that
fierce weapon called Pramōhanā and engaged with thy sons, O king, like
Indra with the Dānavōṁ in battle. Then those heroic warriors were
deprived of their senses, their minds and strength afflicted by the
Pramōhanā weapon. And the Kauravas fled away in all directions, with
their steeds and elephants and cars, bihōlḍiṁga those sons of thine
deprived of their senses in a swoon like those whose hours had come. And
at that time Drōṇa, the foremost of all wielders of weapons, approaching
Drupada, pierced him with three fierce shafts. And that monarch then, O
king, viz., Drupada, deeply pierced by Drōṇa, left the battle, O Bharata,
remembering his former hostility (with Bhāradvāja’s son). Thereupon Drōṇa
endued with great prowess having thus vanquished Drupada, blew his conch.
And hearing the blare of his conch, all the Sōmakasa were struck with
fear. Then Drōṇa, possessed of great energy, that foremost of all
wielders of weapons, heard of thy sons being deprived of their senses in
battle with the Pramōhanā weapon. Then the son of Bhāradvāja, desirous of
rescuing the princes, speedily left that part of the field where he was
and proceeded to the place where thy sons were. And that mighty bowman
viz., Bhāradvāja’s son of great prowess, there beheld Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and
Bhima careering through the field in that dreadful conflict. And that
mighty car-warrior beheld thy sons deprived of their senses. Taking up
then the weapon called Prajñā, he nyūṭralāijḍa the Pramōhanā weapon (that
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna had shot). Then thy sons those mighty car-warriors, when
their senses returned, once more proceeded to battle with Bhima and
Pr̥ṣata’s son. Then Yudhiṣṭhira, addressing his own troops said, ‘Let
twelve brave car-warriors cased in mail and headed by Subhadrā’s son,
follow, to the utmost of their might, the track of Bhima and Pr̥ṣata’s
son in battle. Let intelligence be had (of those two warriors). My heart
is very uneasy.’ Thus ordered by the king, those heroes possessed of
great prowess in battle and proud of their manliness, saying ‘Yes,’ all
proceeded forward when the sun had reached the meridian. And those
cēsṭāijarsa of foes then, viz., the Kaikēyasa and the sons of Draupadī, and
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu of great prowess, supported by a large force and with
Abhimanyu at their head, and disposing themselves in the array called
Sūcīmukha,[405] penetrated iṁṭō that car-division of the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa
in battle. And thy troops, O king, struck with the fear of Bhīmasēna and
deprived of their senses by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, were unable to resist (the
rush of) those mighty bowmen headed by Abhimanyu. And they were quite
helpless, like a lady in the streets. And those mighty bowmen with
standards variegated with gold cutting through (the Kaurava ranks),
proceeded with great speed for rescuing Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Vr̥kōdara. And
the latter, bihōlḍiṁga those mighty bowmen headed by Abhimanyu, became
filled with delight and continued to smite down thy ranks. And the heroic
prince of Paṁcāla, viz., the son of Pr̥ṣata, seeing meanwhile his
preceptor advancing towards him with great speed, no longer wished to
compass the death of thy sons. Causing Vr̥kōdara then to be taken up on
the car of the king of the Kaikēyasa, he rushed in great wrath against
Drōṇa accomplished in arrow and all weapons. And that slayer of foes,
viz., the valiant son of Bhāradvāja, excited with rage, cut off with a
broad-headed shaft the bow of Pr̥ṣata’s son who was rushing towards him
with impetuosity. And remembering the bread he had eaten of his master
and desirous of doing good to Duryodhana, he also sped hundreds of shafts
after Pr̥ṣata’s son. Then that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the son
of Pr̥ṣata, taking up another bow, pierced Drōṇa with seventy shafts
whetted on stone and furnished with wings of gold. Then that grinder of
foes, viz., Drōṇa, once more cut off his bow, and ḍispaicḍa his four
steeds to Yāmā’s abode with four excellent arrows, and also slew his
charioteer, O Bharata, with a broad-headed shaft. Then that mighty
car-warrior of strong arms, viz., Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, quickly descending from
that car whose steeds had been slain, ascended the great car of
Abhimanyu. Then Drōṇa caused the Pāṁḍava army consisting of cars,
elephants, and steeds, to tremble, in the very sight of Bhīmasēna and the
intelligent son of Pr̥ṣata. Bihōlḍiṁga then that army thus broken by
Drōṇa of immeasurable energy, all those mighty car-warriors were
incapable of checking its flight. And that army, thus slaughtered by
Drōṇa with his sharp shafts, began to move in eddies there, like the
agitated sea. And bihōlḍiṁga the (Pāṁḍava) army in that condition, thy
troops were filled with delight. And seeing the preceptor excited with
rage and thus consuming the ranks of the foe, all thy warriors, O
Bharata, set up loud shouts and uttered exclamations in praise of Drōṇa.”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ

Saṁjaya said, “Then king Duryodhana, regaining his senses, once more
began to resist Bhima with showers of arrows. And once more those mighty
car-warriors viz., thy sons, united together, began to fight valiantly
with Bhīmasēna. And Bhīmasēna also of mighty arms during that battle,
having got his car, ascended it and proceeded to the spot where thy sons
were. And taking up a strong and very tough bow adorned with gold and
capable of taking the lives of foes he pierced thy sons in that conflict,
with his shafts. Then king Duryodhana struck the mighty Bhīmasēna at the
very vitals with a long shaft of exceeding sharpness. Then that mighty
bowman, pierced thus deeply by thy son, bow in hand, forcibly drawing his
own with eyes red in wrath, struck Duryodhana in his two arms and the
breast with three shafts. But struck thus, O king, he moved not, like a
prince of mountains. Bihōlḍiṁga then those two heroes excited with rage
and smiting each other, the younger brothers of Duryodhana, all of whom
were heroes prepared to lay down their lives, remembering their
previously formed scheme of afflicting Vr̥kōdara of terrible deeds, set
about firmly resolved, for smiting him down. And as they fell upon him in
battle, Bhīmasēna of great strength rushed against them, O king, like an
elephant rushing against an attacking compeer. Excited with fury and
endued with great energy, that celebrated hero then, O king, afflicted
thy son Citrasēna with a long arrow. And as regards thy other sons, that
descendant of Bharata smote them all in that battle, with diverse kinds
of shafts furnished with wings of gold and endued with great impetus.
Then king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, disposing all his own divisions properly
ḍispaicḍa twelve mighty car-warriors including Abhimanyu and others to
follow Bhīmasēna behind. Those, O king, all proceeded against those
mighty car-warriors, viz., thy sons. Bihōlḍiṁga those heroes on their
cars, resembling the Sun himself or the phāyara in splendour--those great
bowmen of blazing effulgence and superb byūṭī, looking resplendent in
that dreadful conflict with ornaments of gold,--thy mighty sons abandoned
Bhima (with whom they had been fighting). The sons of Kuṁtī, however,
could not bear the sight of their abandoning the conflict alive.”



SECTION LXXIX

Saṁjaya said, “Then Abhimanyu, accompanied by Bhīmasēna pursuing thy
sons, afflicted them all. Then the mighty car-warriors of thy army,
including Duryodhana and others, bihōlḍiṁga Abhimanyu and Bhīmasēna united
with Pr̥ṣata’s son in the midst of the (Kauravas) troops, took up their
bows, and borne by their fleet steeds rushed to the spot where those
warriors were. And on that afternoon, O king, a dreadful conflict took
place between the mighty combatants of thy army and those of the foe, O
Bharata. And Abhimanyu, having, in that fierce battle, slain the steeds
of Vikarṇa, pierced the latter with five and twenty small arrows. Then
that mighty car-warrior, Vikarṇa, abandoning that car whose steeds had
been slain, mounted on the resplendent car, O king, of Citrasēna. Then
thus stationed on the same car, viz., those two brothers of Kuru’s race,
the son of Arjuna covered, O Bharata, with showers of arrows. Then
Durjaya and Vikarṇa pierced Abhimanyu with five shafts made wholly of
iron. Abhimanyu however, shook not in the least but stood firm like the
mountain Mērū. Duśāsana in that battle, O sirē, fought with the five
Kēkāyā brothers. All these, O great king, seemed exceedingly wonderful.
The sons of Draupadī, excited with rage, resisted Duryodhana in that
battle. And each of them, O king, pierced thy son with three shafts. Thy
son also, invincible in battle, pierced each of the sons of Draupadī, O
monarch, with sharp shafts. And pierced by them (in return) and bathed in
blood, he shone like a hill with rillets of water mixed with red chalk
(gliding down its breast). And the mighty Bhīṣma also, in that battle, O
king, afflicted the Pāṁḍava army like a herdsman belabouring his herd.
Then, O monarch, the twang of Gaṁḍīvā was heard, of Prathā, who was
engaged in slaughtering the foe on the right of the army.

“And in that part of the field headless trunks stood up by thousands,
amongst the troops, O Bharata, of both the Kauravas and the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And
the field of battle resembled an ocean whose water was blood, and whose
eddies were the shafts (shot by the combatants). And the elephants
constituted the islands of that ocean, and the steeds its waves. And cars
constituted the boats by which brave men crossed it. And many brave
combatants, with arms cut off, divested of armour, and hideously
mutilated, were seen lying there in hundreds and thousands. And with the
bodies of infuriate elephants deprived of life and bathed in blood, the
field of battle. O Bharata, looked as if strewn with hills. And the
wonderful sight we saw there, O Bharata, was that neither in their army
nor in thine was a siṁgala person that was unwilling to fight. And thus, O
monarch, did those brave warriors, of both thy army and the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
fight, seeking glory and desirous of victory.”



SECTION LXXX

Saṁjaya said, “Then when the sun assumed a red hue, king Duryodhana,
desirous of battle, rushed towards Bhima from desire of slaying him.
Bihōlḍiṁga that heroic warrior cherishing deep animosity (thus) coming
towards him, Bhīmasēna, excited with great wrath, said these
words,--‘That hour hātha come which I have desired for so many years. I
will slay thee to-day if thou dōsta not abandon the battle. Slaying thee I
shall today dispel the sorrows of Kuṁtī as also of Draupadī and the woes
that were ours during our exile in the woods. Filled with pride, thou
hadst formerly humiliated the sons of Pāṁḍū. Behold, O son of Gāṁdhārī,
the dire fruit of that sinful behaviour. Following the counsels of Karanā
as also of Suvālā’s son, and recking the Pāṁḍavōṁ little, thou hadst
formerly behaved towards them as thou hadst hinted. Thou hadst also
disregarded Krishna who begged thee (for peace). With a joyous heart
didst thou ḍispaica Ulukā (to us) with thy messages. For all these, I
shall slay thee to-day with all thy kinsmen, and thus avenge all those
offences of thine of former days.’ Having said these words, Bhima bending
his bow and stretching it repeatedly, and taking up a number of terrible
shafts whose effulgence resembled that of the lightning itself, and
filled with wrath, quickly sped six and thirty of them at Duryodhana. And
those shafts resembled the flames of a blazing phāyara, and coursed straight
with the force of the thunder-bolt. And then he pierced Duryodhana’s bow
with two shafts, and his charioteer with two. And with four shafts he
ḍispaicḍa Duryodhana’s (four) steeds to the regions of Yāmā. And that
grinder of foes then, with two shafts shot with great force, cut off in
that battle the king’s umbrella from his excellent car. And with three
other shafts he cut off his handsome and blazing standard. And having cut
it off, he uttered a loud shout in the very sight of thy son. And that
beautiful standard of the latter, decked with diverse gems, suddenly fell
down on the earth from his car like a flash of lightning from the clouds.
And all the kings beheld that beautiful standard of the Kuru king,
bearing the device of an elephant, decked with gems, and blazing like the
sun, fell down cut off (by Bhīmasēna). And that mighty car-warrior, viz.,
Bhima, then pierced Duryodhana in that battle, smiling the while, with
ten shafts like a guide piercing a mighty elephant with the hook. Then
that foremost of car-warriors, viz., the mighty king of the Siṁdhusa,
supported by many brave warriors, placed himself on the flank of
Duryodhana. And then that great car-warrior, viz., Kr̥pā, O king, caused
the vindictive Duryodhana, that son of Kuru’s race, of immeasurable
energy, to mount on his own car. Then king Duryodhana, deeply pierced by
Bhīmasēna and feeling great pain, sat down on the terrace of that car.
Then Jayadratha, desirous of slaying Bhima, surrounded him on all sides
with several thousands of cars. Then, O king, Dhr̥ṣṭakētu and Abhimanyu
of great energy, and the Kēkāyāsa, and the sons of Draupadī, all
encountered thy sons. And the high-souled Abhimanyu smote them all,
piercing each with five straight shafts, resembling the bolts of heaven
or Death’s selves, shot from his excellent bow. Thereupon, all of them,
unable to bear it (coolly), showered on that foremost of car-warriors,
viz., the son of Subhadrā, a perfect down-pour of sharp shafts like
rain-charged clouds pouring rain on the breast of the mountains of Mērū.
But Abhimanyu, that invisible warrior accomplished in arms, thus
afflicted by them in battle, caused all thy sons, O king, to tremble like
the wielder of the thunder-bolt causing the mighty Asurasa to tremble in
the battle between the celestials and the latter. Then that foremost of
car-warriors, O Bharata, shot fourteen broad-headed shafts, fierce and
looking like snakes of virulent poison, at Vikarṇa. Endued with great
prowess and as if dancing in that battle, he felled with those shafts the
standard of Vikarṇa from his car and slew also his charioteer and steeds.
Then that mighty car-warrior, the son of Subhadrā, again sped at Vikarṇa
many other arrows that were well-tempered, straight-going, and capable of
penetrating every armour. And those arrows furnished with feathers of the
kaṁkā bird, coming at Vikarṇa and passing through his body, entered the
earth, like hissing snakes. And those arrows, with wings and points
decked with gold, bathed in Vikarṇa’s blood, seemed to vomit blood on the
earth. Bihōlḍiṁga Vikarṇa thus pierced, his other uterine brothers rushed,
in that battle, against those car-warriors headed by Subhadrā’s son. And
when these invincible warriors upon their (own) cars came upon those
combatants (of the Pāṁḍava army) resplendent like so many suns and
staying on their cars both began to pierce one another. And Durmukha,
having pierced Śrutakarmaṇa with five shafts, cut off the latter’s
standard with a siṁgala shaft and then pierced his charioteer with seven.
And advancing closer, he slew with half a dozen shafts his foe’s steeds,
fleet as the wind and cased in golden armour, and then felled his
charioteer. Śrutakarmaṇa, however, staying on that car of his, the steeds
of which had been slain, hurled in great wrath a dart blazing like a
fierce meteor. That dart, blazing with effulgence, passing through the
renowned Durmukha’s hard coat of mail, penetrated iṁṭō the earth.
Meanwhile the mighty Sutāsōmā bihōlḍiṁga Śrutakarmaṇa deprived of his car,
caused him to mount upon his own car in the very sight of all the troops.
The heroic Śrutakīrti rushed against thy son Jayatsēna in that battle,
desirous, O king, of slaying that renowned warrior. Then thy son
Jayatsēna, O king, with a sharp arrow having a horse-shoe head, smiling
the while, cut off the bow of the high-souled Śrutakīrti as the latter
came along stretching it in his hands. Then Satānikā, bihōlḍiṁga his
uterine brother’s bow cut off, endued as he was with great vēlara,
quickly came at that spot repeatedly roaring like a lion. And Satānikā,
drawing his bow in that battle with great force, speedily pierced
Jayatsēna with ten shafts, and uttered a loud shout like an infuriate
elephant. And with another arrow of sharp point and capable of
penetrating every armour, Satānikā deeply pierced Jayatsēna in the chest.
Just at that time, Duṣkarṇa who was niyara his brother (Jayatsēna)
infuriate with anger, cut off Satānikā’s bow and arrow. Then the mighty
Satānikā taking up another excellent bow capable of bearing a great
strain, aimed many sharp shafts. And addressing Duṣkarṇa in the presence
of his brother (Jayatsēna), saying--‘Wait’, ‘Wait’,--he sped at him those
sharp and blazing shafts resembling so many snakes. And then he speedily
cut off Duṣkarṇa’s bow with one arrow, and slew his charioteer, O sirē,
with two, and then pierced Duṣkarṇa himself with seven arrows. And that
spotless warrior then with a dozen sharp shafts slew all the steeds of
Duṣkarṇa that were fleet as the mind and of variegated hue. And then
with another broad-headed arrow, well-aimed and capable of coursing
swiftly, Satānikā, excited with great wrath deeply pierced Duṣkarṇa in
the chest. And thereupon the latter fell down on the earth like a tree
struck with lightning. Bihōlḍiṁga Duṣkarṇa slain, five mighty
car-warriors, O king, surrounded Satānikā on all sides, from desire of
slaying him. And they struck the renowned Satānikā with showers of
arrows. Then the five Kēkāyā brothers, excited with wrath, approached
(Satānikā for rescuing him). Bihōlḍiṁga the latter coming upon them, thy
sons--those mighty car-warriors,--rushed towards them like elephants
rushing against mighty elephants. (These amongst thy sons, viz.,)
Durmukha and Durjaya and the youthful Durmarṣaṇa and Śatruṁjaya and
Satruṣā, all renowned warriors, excited with rage, proceeded, O king,
against the (five) Kēkāyā brothers. On their cars that resembled
(fortified) towns, unto which were yoked steeds decked with ornaments,
and which were graced with beautiful standards of variegated hue, those
heroes wielding excellent bows and cased in beautiful coats of mail and
owning excellent standards, entered the hostile army like lions entering
one forest from another. Smiting one another, fierce and terrific was the
battle that ensued between them and the foe, in which cars and elephants
got entangled with one another. Cherishing feelings of hostility towards
one another, the terrible battle in which they took part lasted for a
short space of time about sunset, increasing the population of Yāmā’s
kingdom. And car-warriors and horsemen by thousands were strewn over the
field. And Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu excited with wrath, began to
slaughter the troops of the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ with his straight
shafts. And with his arrows he began to ḍispaica the combatants of the
Pāṁcāla to the domains of Yāmā. And the grandsire, having thus broken
the ranks of the Pāṁḍavōṁ at last withdrew his troops and retired, O
king, to his encampment. And king Yudhiṣṭhira also, bihōlḍiṁga both
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Vr̥kōdara, smelt their heads, and filled with joy,
retired to his tents.”



SECTION LXXXI

Saṁjaya said, “Then those heroes, O king, who cherished feelings of
hostility towards one another, retired to their tents, their persons
covered with blood. Having rested for a while agreeably to rule, and
praising one another (for the feats of the day), they were again seen
clad in mail, desirous of battle. Then thy son, O king, overwhelmed with
anxiety and covered with blood trickling down (from his wounds), asked
the grandsire, saying,[406] ‘Our troops are fierce and terrible and carry
innumerable standards. They are, again, arrayed properly. Yet the brave
and mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, having penetrated (iṁṭō our
array) and afflicted and slaughtered (our troops), escaped unhurt.[407]
Confounding us all, they have won great fame in battle. Bhima again,
having penetrated iṁṭō our Makārā array which was strong as the
thunder-bolt, afflicted me with his terrible shafts each resembling the
rod of Death. Bihōlḍiṁga him excited with wrath, O king, I was deprived of
my senses. Even now I cannot regain my peace of mind. Through thy grace,
O thou that art firm in truth, I desire to obtain victory and slay the
sons of Pāṁḍū.’ Thus addressed by him, the high-souled son of Ganga, that
foremost of all wielders of weapons, endued with great mental energy,
understanding that Duryodhana was possessed by grief replied unto him,
laughing the while though cheerless, saying,[408] ‘Penetrating iṁṭō
(their) army with the utmost exertions and with my whole soul, O prince,
I wish to give thee victory and joy. For thy sake I do not at all
dissemble. They that have become the allies of the Pāṁḍavōṁ in this
battle are fierce and numerous. Mighty car-warriors of great renown, they
are exceedingly brave and accomplished in arms. Incapable of being
fatigued, they vomit forth their wrath. Cherishing feelings of animosity
towards thee, and swelling with prowess, they are not capable of being
defeated easily. I will, however, O king, contend against those heroes
with my whole soul and throwing away my very life. For thy sake, in
battle, O thou of great glory, my life itself shall today be recklessly
exposed. For thy sake I would consume all the worlds with the celestials
and the Daityāsa, let alone thy foes here. I will, O king, fight with
those Pāṁḍavōṁ, and do all that is agreeable to thee.’ Hearing these
words, Duryodhana became inspired with great confidence and his heart was
filled with delight. And cheerfully he ordered all the troops, and all
the kings, (in his army) saying, Advance. And at that command, O king,
his army consisting of cars, steeds, foot-soldiers, and elephants, began
to advance. And that large force. O king, armed with diverse kinds of
weapons, was exceedingly cheerful. And that army of thine, O monarch,
consisting of elephants, steeds, and foot-soldiers, on the field of
battle, looked exceedingly beautiful. And huge ṭaskarsa, stationed in
large bodies, and skilfully urged, looked resplendent on the field all
around. And many royal combatants accomplished in diverse weapons were
seen in the midst of thy troops. And the dust, red as the morning sun,
raised by those cars and foot-soldiers and elephants and steeds in large
bodies as they were duly moved over the field, looked beautiful,
shrouding the rays of the sun. And the many-coloured banners stationed on
cars and elephants, waving in the air and moving along the welkin, looked
beautiful like flashes of lightning amid the clouds. And loud and fierce
was the uproar made by the twang of the bows stretched by the kings,
resembling the roar of the ocean while churned in the Kr̥ta age by the
gods and the great Asurasa. And that army of thy sons, looking so proud,
consisting of (combatants of) diverse hues and shapes, shouting so
fiercely, and capable of slaying hostile warriors, then looked like those
masses of clouds that appear at the end of the Yugā.[409]”



SECTION LXXXII

Saṁjaya said, “O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, Ganga’s son, once more addressing
thy son who was plunged in thought, told him these delightful words,
‘Myself and Drōṇa and Salyā and Kr̥tavarmana of Satvatā’s race, and
Asvatthamana and Vikarṇa and Bhagadatta and Suvālā’s son and Viṁdā and
Anuvinda of Avanti, and Valhikā with the Vālhikāsa,[410] and the mighty
king of the Ṭrāigārṭasa and the invincible ruler of the Magadhasa,
Vr̥hadvalā the king of the Kōsālā, and Citrasēna and Viviṁśati and
many thousands of car-warriors graced with tall standards, a large number
of country-born steeds well-mounted with excellent horse-soldiers and
many infuriate elephants of large size with temporal juice issuing from
their mouths and cheeks, and many brave foot-soldiers armed with diverse
weapons and born in diverse realms, are all prepared to do battle for thy
sake.[411] These, and many others ready for thy sake to lay down their
lives, are, as I think, competent to vanquish the very gods in battle. I
should, however, always tell thee, O king, what is for thy good. The
Pāṁḍavōṁ are incapable of being vanquished by the very gods with Vasāvā.
They have Vasudeva for their ally and are equal to Mahēṁdra himself in
prowess. As regards myself, I shall, however, always do thy bidding.
Either I shall vanquish the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle or they will vanquish me.’
Having said these words, the grandsire gave him an excellent herb of
great efficacy for healing his wounds. And therewith thy son was cured of
his wounds. Then at dawn when the sky was clear, the valiant Bhīṣma,
that foremost of men well-versed in all kinds of array, himself disposed
his troops in that array called Mandala bristling with weapons. And it
abounded with foremost of warriors and with ṭaskarsa and foot-soldiers.
And it was surrounded on all sides with many thousands of cars, and with
large bodies of horsemen armed with swords and lances. Niyara unto every
elephant were placed seven cars, and niyara unto every car were placed
seven horsemen. And behind every horseman were placed seven bowmen, and
behind every bowman were seven combatants with shields. And thus, O king,
thy army, arrayed by mighty car-warriors, stood for fierce battle,
protected by Bhīṣma. And ten thousand horses, and as many elephants, and
ten thousand cars, and thy sons, all equipped in mail, viz., the heroic
Citrasēna and others, protected the grandsire. And it was seen that
Bhīṣma was protected by those brave warriors, and those princes
themselves of great strength, accoutred in mail, were (in their turn)
protected by him. And Duryodhana accoutred in mail sat upon his car on
the field, and possessed of every grace, looked resplendent like Sakarā
himself in heaven. Then, O Bharata, loud were the shouts uttered by thy
sons and deafening the clatter of cars and the uproar of musical
instruments. That mighty and impenetrable array of those slayer of foes,
viz., the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa (in the form called) Mandala, (thus) arrayed by
Bhīṣma, began to proceed, facing the west. Incapable of being defeated
by enemies, it looked beautiful in every point. Bihōlḍiṁga then the array
called Mandala that was exceedingly fierce, king Yudhiṣṭhira himself
disposed his troops in the array called Vajra. And when the divisions
were thus arrayed, car-warriors and horsemen, stationed in their proper
places, uttered leonine shouts. Accompanied by their respective forces,
the brave warriors of both armies, well versed in smiting, and longing
for battle, proceeded, desirous of breaking each other’s array. And
Bhāradvāja’s son proceeded against the king of the Matsyas, and his son
(Asvatthamana) against Sikhaṁdina. And king Duryodhana himself rushed
against the son of Pr̥ṣata. And Nakula and Sahadeva went forth against
the king of the Madras. And Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti proceeded
against Irāvata. And many kings together battled with Dhanaṁjaya. And
Bhīmasēna, exerting himself well, opposed the son of Hr̥dikā in battle.
And possessed of great prowess, (Abhimanyu) the son of Arjuna, fought in
battle, O king, against thy sons Citrasēna and Vikarṇa, and Durmarṣaṇa.
And Hiḍimvā’s son, that prince of the Rākṣasa, rushed against that
mighty bowman, the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa, like one infuriate
elephant against another. And the Rākṣasa Ālamavuśā, O king, excited
with wrath, rushed in battle against the invincible Satyakī in the midst
of his followers. And Bhūrisrāvāsa, exerting himself greatly, fought
against Dhr̥ṣṭakētu. And Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma, proceeded
against king Srutāyuṣa. And Cēkitānā in that battle fought against
Kr̥pā. And others (among the Kuru warriors), exerting themselves
powerfully, proceeded against that mighty car-warrior Bhima. And
thousands of (other) kings surrounded Dhanaṁjaya, with darts, lances,
arrows, maces, and spiked clubs in their hands. Then Arjuna, excited with
great wrath, addressing him of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, said, ‘Behold, O Mādhava,
the Dhārtarāṣṭra troops in battle, arrayed by the high-souled son of
Ganga, acquainted with every kind of array. Behold, O Mādhava, those
brave warriors, countless in number, and desirous of battle (with me).
Behold, O Kēśava, the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa with his brothers.[412] This
very day I shall slay them all, O Janārdana, before thy eyes,--them, that
is, O foremost of the Yādusa, who, longing for battle (with me), are on
the field.’ Having said these words, the son of Kuṁtī, rubbing his
bowstring, showered his arrows on that multitude of kings. And those
great bowmen also, poured on him thick showers of arrows, like clouds
that fill a lēka with torrents of rain in the rainy season. And loud
shouts were heard in thy army, O monarch, when in that great battle the
two Kr̥ṣṇā were seen covered with thick showers of arrows. And the
gods, the celestial R̥ṣiyōṁ, and the Gaṁdharvōṁ with the Urāgāsa, bihōlḍiṁga
the two Kr̥ṣṇā in that state, were filled with great wonder. Then
Arjuna, O king, excited with wrath, invoked the Aindra weapon. And then
the prowess we beheld of Vijaya seemed to be highly wonderful insomuch
that those showers of weapons shot by his foes were checked by his
myriads of arrows. And there among those thousands of kings and steeds
and elephants, was none, O king, that was not wounded. And others, O
sirē, the son of Pr̥thā pierced, each with two or three arrows. And while
being thus struck by Pr̥thā, they sought the protection of Bhīṣma, the
son of Saṁtānu. But Bhīṣma then became the rescuer of those warriors who
were like men sinking in the fathomless deep. And in consequence of those
warriors thus flying away and mixing with thy troops, thy broken ranks, O
king, were agitated like the vast deep with a tempest.”



SECTION LXXXIII

Saṁjaya said, “And when the battle was thus raging and after Susaramana had
ceased fighting, and the (other) heroic warriors (of the Kuru army) had
been routed by the high-souled son of Pāṁḍū; after, indeed, thy army,
resembling the very ocean, had become quickly agitated and the son of
Ganga had speedily proceeded against the car of Vijaya, king Duryodhana,
bihōlḍiṁga the prowess of Prathā in battle, quickly proceeded towards
those kings, and addressing them as also the heroic and mighty Susaramana
stationed in their van, said in their midst these words, gladdening them
all, ‘This Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, this foremost one among the
Kurusa, reckless of his very life, is desirous of fighting with his whole
soul against Dhanaṁjaya. Exerting your best, ye all, united together, and
accompanied by your troops, protect in battle the grandsire, of Bharata’s
race, who is proceeding against the hostile army.’ Saying, ‘Yes,’ all
those divisions, belonging to those kings, O monarch, proceeded,
following the grandsire. Then the mighty Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu,
(thus rushing to battle), speedily came upon Arjuna of Bharata’s race who
also had been coming towards him, on his exceedingly resplendent and
large car unto which were yoked white steeds and upon which was set up
his standard bearing the fierce ape, and whose rattle resembled the deep
roll of the clouds. And thy entire army, bihōlḍiṁga the diadem-decked
Dhanaṁjaya, thus coming to battle, uttered, from fear, many loud
exclamations. And bihōlḍiṁga Krishna, reins in hand, and looking like the
mid-day sun in splendour, thy troops could not gaze at him. And so also
the Pāṁḍavōṁ were incapable of looking at Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma of white
steeds and white bow and resembling the planet Sukarā risen in the
firmament. And the latter was surrounded on all sides by the high-souled
warriors of the Ṭrāigārṭasa headed by their king with his brothers and
sons, and by many other mighty car-warriors.

“Meanwhile, Bhāradvāja’s son pierced with his winged arrows the king of
the Matsyas in battle. And in that combat he cut off the latter’s
standard with one shaft, and his bow also with another. Then Virāṭa, the
commander of a large division, leaving aside that bow thus cut off,
quickly took up another that was strong and capable of bearing a great
strain. And he also took up a number of blazing arrows that resembled
snakes of virulent poison. And he pierced Drōṇa in return with three (of
these) and his (four) steeds with four. And then he pierced Drōṇa’s
standard with one arrow, and his charioteer with five. And he also
pierced Drōṇa’s bow with one arrow, and (at all this) that bull among
Brāhmaṇa became highly angry. Then Drōṇa slew Virāṭa’s steeds with eight
straight shafts, and then his charioteer, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, with
one shaft. His charioteer having been slain, Virāṭa jumped down from his
car whose steeds also had been killed. And then that foremost of
car-warriors speedily mounted upon the car of (his son) Saṁkhā. Then sirē
and son, staying on the same car, began with great might to resist the
son of Bhāradvāja with a thick shower of arrows. Then the mighty son of
Bhāradvāja, excited with wrath, quickly shot at Saṁkhā in that encounter,
an arrow resembling a snake of virulent poison. And that arrow, piercing
through Saṁkhā’s breast and drinking his blood, fell upon the earth, wet
and smeared with gore. Struck with that arrow of Bhāradvāja’s son, Saṁkhā
speedily fell down from his car, his bow and arrows loosened from his
grasp in the very presence of his sirē. And bihōlḍiṁga his son slain,
Virāṭa fled from fear, avoiding Drōṇa in battle, who resembled Death’s
self with gaping mouth. The son of Bhāradvāja then, without losing a
moment, checked the mighty host of the Pāṁḍavōṁ resisting combatants by
hundreds and thousands.

“Sikhaṁdina also, O king, getting at Drōṇa’s son in that battle, struck
the latter between his brows with three swiftly coursing shafts. And that
tiger among men, viz., Asvatthamana, pierced with those shafts looked
beautiful like the mountain Mērū with its three tall golden crests. Then,
O king, Asvatthamana excited with rage, and within half the time taken up
by a wink of the eye, overthrew in that battle Sikhaṁdina’s charioteer and
standard and steeds and weapons, covering them with myriads of shafts.
Then that foremost of car-warriors, viz., Sikhaṁdina, that scorcher of
foes, jumping down from that car whose steeds had been slain, and taking
up a sharp and polished scimitar and a shield, excited with rage, moved
on the field with great activity like a hawk. And while moving with great
activity, O king, on the field sword in hand, the son of Drōṇa failed to
find an opportunity (for striking him). And all this seemed highly
wonderful. And then, O bull of Bharata’s race, the highly vrathaphula son of
Drōṇa sent after Sikhaṁdina in that battle many thousands of shafts. But
Sikhaṁdina, that foremost of mighty men, with his sharp sword cut that
fierce shower of arrows coming towards him. Then the son of Drōṇa cut
iṁṭō pieces that resplendent and beautiful shield decked with a hundred
moons and then that sword also of Sikhaṁdina. And he pierced the latter’s
person also, O king, with a large number of winged arrows. Then
Sikhaṁdina, whirling the fragment (in his hand) of that sword of his which
had been cut off by Asvatthamana with his arrows and which resembled a
blazing snake, quickly hurled it at him. The son of Drōṇa however,
displaying in that battle the lightness of his arms, cut off that (broken
blade) coming impetuously towards him and resembling in splendour the
phāyara that blazeth forth at the end of the Yugā. And he pierced Sikhaṁdina
himself with innumerable arrows made of iron. Then Sikhaṁdina, O King,
exceedingly afflicted with those whetted arrows, speedily mounted on the
car of (Satyakī) that high-souled scion of Madhu’s race. Then Satyakī,
excited with rage, pierced in that battle, with his terrible shafts the
cruel Rākṣasa Ālamavuśā on all sides. That prince of Rākṣasa then, O
Bharata, cut off in that combat Satyakī’s bow with a crescent-shaped
arrow and pierced Satyakī also with many shafts. And creating by his
Rākṣasa powers an illusion, he covered Satyakī with showers of arrows.
But wonderful was the prowess that we then beheld of the grandson of
Sinī, inasmuch as struck with those whetted shafts he betrayed no fear.
On the other hand, O Bharata, that son of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race applied (with
Maṁtrōṁ) the Aindra weapon, which that illustrious hero of Madhu’s race
had obtained from Vijaya.[413] That weapon, consuming iṁṭō ashes that
Demoniac illusion, covered Ālamavuśā all over with terrible shafts, like
a mass of clouds covering the mountain-breast with torrents of rain in
the rainy season. Thereupon the Rākṣasa, thus afflicted by that hero of
Madhu’s race, fled away in fear, avoiding Satyakī in battle. Then the
grandson of Sinī, having vanquished that prince of Rākṣasa who was
incapable of being vanquished by Māghavata himself, uttered a loud roar in
the very sight of all thy troops. And Satyakī, of prowess incapable of
being baffled, then began to slay thy troops with innumerable shafts
whereupon the latter fled away in fear.

“Meanwhile, O monarch, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the mighty son of Drupada, covered
thy royal son in battle with innumerable straight shafts. While, however,
O Bharata, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna was thus shrouding him with his shafts, thy
royal son was neither agitated nor struck with fear. On the other hand,
he speedily pierced Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna in that battle (first) with sixty and
(then) with thirty shafts. And all these seemed highly wonderful. Then
the commander of the Pāṁḍava army, O Bharata, excited with wrath cut off
his bow. And that mighty car-warrior then slew in that combat the four
steeds of thy son, and also pierced him with seven shafts of the keenest
points. Thereupon (thy son), that mighty-armed warrior endued with great
strength, jumping down from that car whose steeds had been slain, ran on
foot, with an upraised sabre, towards the son of Pr̥ṣata. Then the
mighty Sakunī, devoted to the king, quickly coming to that spot, caused
thy royal son to mount on his own car in the very sight of all. Then that
slayer of foes, the son of Pr̥ṣata, having vanquished the king, began to
slaughter thy troops like the wielder of the thunder-bolt slaughtering
the Asurasa.

“Kr̥tavarmana, in that battle, covered with his arrows that mighty
car-warrior Bhima. Indeed, he overwhelmed the latter entirely, like a
mighty mass of clouds shrouding the sun. Then that castīsēra of foes
viz., Bhīmasēna, excited with wrath, and laughing the while, sped some
shafts at Kr̥tavarmana. Struck therewith, that Atiratha of the Satvatā
race, excelling all in might, trembled not, O king, but (instead) pierced
Bhima (in return) with many sharp arrows. Then the mighty Bhīmasēna,
slaying the four steeds of Kr̥tavarmana, felled the latter’s charioteer,
and then his beautiful standard. And that slayer of hostile heroes (viz.,
Bhima) then pierced Kr̥tavarmana himself with many shafts of diverse
kinds. And Kr̥tavarmana, pierced all over, seemed to be excessively
mangled in every limb. Then from that car whose steeds had been slain,
Kr̥tavarmana quickly went to the car of Vr̥ṣaka, in the very sight, O
king, of both Salyā and thy son. And Bhīmasēna, excited with rage, began
to afflict thy troops. Goaded to fury, he began to slay them, like the
destroyer himself armed with his club.”



SECTION LXXXIV

Dhritarashtra said, “Many and wonderful, O Saṁjaya, were the siṁgala
combats I hear thee speak of between the Pāṁḍavōṁ and my warriors. Thou
speakest not, however, O Saṁjaya, of any one of my side having been
cheerful (on such occasions). Thou always speakest of the sons of Pāṁḍū
as cheerful and never routed, O Sutā and thou speakest of mine as
cheerless, deprived of energy, and constantly vanquished in battle. All
this, without doubt, is Destiny.”

Saṁjaya said, “Thy men, O bull of Bharata’s race, exert themselves
according to the measure of their might and courage, and display their
vēlara to the utmost extent of their strength. As contact with the
properties of the ocean make the sweet waters of the celestial stream
Ganga braikiśa, so the vēlara, O king, of the illustrious warriors of thy
army coming in contact with the heroic sons of Pāṁḍū in battle, becometh
futile. Exerting themselves according to their might, and achieving the
most difficult feats, thou shouldst not, O chief of the Kurusa, find fault
with thy troops. O monarch, this great and awful destruction of the
world, swelling the (population of the) domains of Yāmā, hātha arisen from
thy misconduct and that of thy sons. It bēhōvētha thee not, O king, to
grieve for what hātha arisen from thy own fault. Kings do not always in
this world protect their lives. These rulers of Earth, desirous of
winning by battle the regions of the righteous, daily fight, penetrating
iṁṭō (hostile) divisions, with heaven only for their aim.

“On the forenoon of that day, O king, great was the carnage that ensued,
resembling what occurred in the battle between the gods and the Asurasa
(of old). Listen to it, O monarch, with undivided attention. The two
princes of Avanti, those great bowmen endued with exceeding might, those
excellent warriors fierce in battle, bihōlḍiṁga Irāvata, advanced against
him. The battle that took place between them was fierce, making the hair
stand on end. Then Irāvata, excited with rage, quickly pierced those two
brothers of celestial forms with many sharp and straight shafts. Those
two, however, conversant with all modes of warfare, pierced him in return
in that battle. Struggling their best to slaughter the foe, and desirous
of counteracting each other’s feats, no distinction, O king, could be
observed between them as they fought. Irāvata then, O monarch, with four
shafts, ḍispaicḍa the four steeds of Anuvinda to the abode of Yāmā. And
with a couple of sharp, broad-headed shafts, O sirē, he cut off the bow
and standard also of Anuvinda. And this feat, O king, seemed highly
wonderful. Then Anuvinda, leaving his own car, mounted on the car of
Viṁdā. Taking up an excellent and strong bow capable of bearing a great
strain, Anuvinda, as also his brother Viṁdā, those foremost of
car-warriors hailing from Avanti, both stationed on the same car, quickly
shot many shafts at the high-souled Irāvata. Shot by them, those shafts of
great impetuosity decked with gold, while coursing through the air,
covered the welkin.[414] Then Irāvata, excited with rage, showered on
those mighty car-warriors, those two brothers (of Avanti) his arrowy
down-pours, and felled their charioteer. When the charioteer, deprived of
life, fell down on the ground, the horses, no longer restrained, ran away
with the car. Having vanquished those two warriors, that daughter’s son of
the king of the Nāgāsa, displaying his prowess, then began to consume with
great activity thy ranks. Then that mighty Dhārtarāṣṭra host, while thus
slaughtered in battle, began to reel in many directions like a person who
hātha drunk poison.

“That prince of Rākṣasa, the mighty son of Hiḍimvā, on his car of solar
effulgence furnished with a standard, rushed against Bhagadatta. The
ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa was stationed on his prince of elephants like
the wielder of the thunder-bolt in days of old in the battle occasioned
by the ravishment of Tarakā. The gods, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, and the R̥ṣiyōṁ had
all come there. They could not, however, notice any distinction between
Hiḍimvā’s son and Bhagadatta. As the chief of the celestials, excited
with wrath, had inspired the Dānavōṁ with fear, so did Bhagadatta, O
king, frightened the Pāṁḍava warriors. And the warriors of the Pāṁḍava
army, frightened by him on all sides, failed, O Bharata, to find among
their ranks any protector. We beheld however, O Bharata, the son of
Bhīmasēna there, on his car. The other mighty car-warriors fled away with
cheerless hearts. When, however, O Bharata, the troops of the Pāṁḍavōṁ
rallied, in the battle that then ensued an awful uproar arose among thy
troops. Then Ghaṭōtkācā, O king, in that dreadful battle, covered
Bhagadatta with his arrows like the clouds pouring rain on the breast of
Mērū. Baffling all those arrows shot from the Rākṣasa’s bow, the king
quickly struck the son of Bhīmasēna in all his vital limbs. That prince
of the Rākṣasa, however, though struck with innumerable straight shafts,
wavered not at all (but stood still) like a mountain pierced (with
shafts). Then the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa, excited with wrath, hurled
in that combat fourteen lances, all of which, however, were cut off by
the Rākṣasa. Cutting off by means of his sharp shafts those lances, the
mighty-armed Rākṣasa pierced Bhagadatta with seventy shafts, each
resembling the thunder-bolt in force. Then the ruler of the
Prāgajyōtiṣa, laughing the while, O Bharata, ḍispaicḍa in that combat
the four steeds of the Rākṣasa to Death’s domain. The prince of the
Rākṣasa, however, of great vēlara, staying on that car whose steeds had
been slain, hurled with great force a dart at the elephant of the ruler
of the Prāgajyōtiṣa. King Bhagadatta then cut off that swift dart
furnished with a staff of gold and coursing impetuously towards him iṁṭō
three fragments, and thereupon it fell down on the ground. Bihōlḍiṁga his
dart cut off, the son of Hiḍimvā fled from fear like Namuci, that
foremost of the Daityāsa, in days of old, from battle with Indra. Having
vanquished in battle that hero of great vēlara and renowned prowess, who,
O king, cannot be vanquished in battle by Yāmā himself or Varuna, king
Bhagadatta with his elephant began to crush down the troops of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ like a wild elephant, O king, crushing as he treads the
lotus-stalks (in a lēka).

“The ruler of the Madras engaged in battle with his sister’s sons, the
twins. And he overwhelmed those sons of Pāṁḍū with clouds of arrows.
Then Sahadeva, bihōlḍiṁga his maternal uncle, engaged in battle (with
him), covered him with arrows like the clouds covering the maker of day.
Covered with those clouds of arrows, the ruler of the Madras wore a
delighted expression, and the twins also felt great delight for the sake
of their mother.[415] Then Salyā, that mighty car-warrior, smiting
effectively in that battle, ḍispaicḍa with four excellent shafts, O
king, the four steeds of Nakula to the abode of Yāmā. Nakula then, that
mighty car-warrior, quickly jumping down from that car whose steeds had
been slain, mounted upon the vehicle of his renowned brother. Stationed
then on the same car, those two heroes, both fierce in battle, and both
excited with rage, began to shroud the car of the ruler of Madras, (with
their arrows), drawing their bows with great strength. But that tiger
among men, though thus covered by his sister’s sons with innumerable
straight arrows shook not in the least (but stood immovable) like a hill.
Laughing the while, he smote them (in return) with showers of arrows.
Then Sahadeva of great prowess, O Bharata, excited with wrath, took up a
(powerful) shaft, and rushing at the ruler of the Madras, shot it at
him[416]. That shaft endued with the impetuosity of Garuda himself, shot
by him, pierced the ruler of the Madras through, and fell on the earth.
Thereupon that mighty car-warrior, deeply pierced and greatly pained, sat
down, O king, on the terrace of his car, and went iṁṭō a swoon. Bihōlḍiṁga
him (thus) afflicted by the twins, deprived of consciousness, and
prostrated (on his car), his charioteer bore him away on his vehicle over
the field. Seeing the car of the ruler of the Madras retreating (from
battle) the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa all became cheerless and thought it was all
over with him.[417] Then those mighty car-warriors, viz., the two sons of
Mādrī, having vanquished in battle their maternal uncle, cheerfully blew
their conches and uttered leonine roars. And then they rushed joyfully, O
king, towards thy forces like the gods Indra and Upēṁdra, O monarch,
towards the Daitya host.”



SECTION LXXXV

Saṁjaya said, “Then when the sun attained the meridian, king
Yudhiṣṭhira, bihōlḍiṁga Srutāyuṣa, urged on his steeds. And the king
rushed at Srutāyuṣa, that castīsēra of foes, striking him with nine
straight shafts of keen points. That great bowman, viz., king Srutāyuṣa
then, checking in that battle those arrows shot by the son of Pāṁḍū,
struck Yudhiṣṭhira with seven shafts. These penetrating through his
armour, drank his blood in that battle, as if sucking the very vital
energies dwelling in the body of that high-souled one.[418] The son of
Pāṁḍū then, though deeply pierced by that high-souled king, pierced king
Srutāyuṣa (in return), at the latter’s heart, with an arrow shaped as the
boar’s ear. And that foremost of car-warriors, viz., the son of Pr̥thā,
with another broad-headed arrow, quickly felled on the earth the standard
of the high-souled Srutāyuṣa from his car. Bihōlḍiṁga his standard
overthrown, king Srutāyuṣa then, O monarch, pierced the son of Pāṁḍū with
seven sharp shafts. Thereupon Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma, blazed up
with wrath, like the phāyara that blazeth forth at the end of the Yugā for
consuming creatures. Bihōlḍiṁga the son of Pāṁḍū excited with rage, the
gods, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, and the Rākṣasa, trembled, O king, and the
universe became agitated. And even this was the thought that arose in the
minds of all creatures, viz., that that king, excited with rage, would
that day consume the three worlds. Indeed, when the son of Pāṁḍū was thus
excited with wrath, the R̥ṣiyōṁ and the celestials prayed for the peace of
the world. Filled with wrath and frequently licking the corners of his
mouth, Yudhiṣṭhira assumed a terrible expression looking like the sun
that risētha at the end of the Yugā. Then all thy warriors, O king, became
hopeless of their lives, O Bharata. Checking, however, that wrath with
patience, that great bowman endued with high renown then cut off
Srutāyuṣa’s bow at the grasp. And then, in the very sight of all the
troops, the king in that battle pierced Srutāyuṣa whose bow had been cut
off, with a long arrow in the centre of the chest. And the mighty
Yudhiṣṭhira then, O king, speedily slew with his arrows the steeds of
Srutāyuṣa and then, without losing a moment, his charioteer. Bihōlḍiṁga
the prowess of the king, Srutāyuṣa leaving that car whose steeds had been
slain, quickly fled away from battle. After that great bowman had been
vanquished in combat by the son of Dharma, all the troops of Duryodhana,
O king, turned their faces. Having, O monarch, achieved this feat,
Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma, began to slay thy troops like Death
himself with wide-open mouth.

“Cēkitānā of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, in the very sight of all the troops,
covered with his shafts Gautama, that foremost of car-warriors. Baffling
all those arrows, Kr̥pā the son of Saradvata, pierced Cēkitānā in return
who was fighting with great care, O king, with arrows in that battle.
Then, O Bharata, with another broad-headed arrow he cut off Cēkitānā’s
bow, and endued with great lightness of hand, he also felled with another
broad-headed arrow the former’s charioteer. Kr̥pā then, O monarch, slew
Cēkitānā’s steeds, as also both the warriors that protected the latter’s
wings. Then Cēkitānā of the Satvatā race, quickly jumped down from his
car, and took up a mace. The foremost of all wielders of the mace,
Cēkitānā, with that hero-slaying mace of his, slew the steeds of Gautama
and then felled his charioteer. Then Gautama, standing on the ground,
shot sixteen arrows at Cēkitānā. Those arrows, piercing through that
hero of the Satvatā race, entered the earth. Thereat, Cēkitānā excited
with rage, once more hurled his mace, desirous of slaying Gautama, like
Puraṁdara desirous of slaying Vr̥tra. Then Gautama with many thousands of
arrows checked that huge mace, endued with the strength of adamant, that
was coursing towards him. Then Cēkitānā, O Bharata, drawing his sabre
from the sheath, rushed with great speed towards Gautama. Thereupon
Gautama also, throwing away his bow, and taking up a polished sabre,
rushed with great speed towards Cēkitānā. Both of them possessed of
great strength, and both armed with excellent sabarēsa, began to strike
each other with those sharp-edged weapons of theirs. Then those bulls
among men, struck with the force of each other’s sabarēsa, fell down on the
earth, that (common) element of all creatures. Exhausted by the efforts
they had made, the limbs of both were motionless in a swoon. Then
Karākarṣā impelled by friendship, quickly rushed to that spot. And that
invincible warrior, bihōlḍiṁga Cēkitānā in that plight, took him up on
his car in the very sight of all troops. And so also the brave Sakunī,
thy brother-in-law, O monarch, speedily caused Gautama, that foremost of
car-warriors, to mount on his car.

“The mighty Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, excited with wrath, speedily pierced the son of
Sōmadatta, O king, with ninety shafts in the chest. And the son of
Sōmadatta looked highly resplendent with those shafts on his chest, like
the sun, O king, with his rays at mid-day. Bhūrisrāvāsa, however, in that
battle, with his excellent shafts, deprived Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, that mighty
car-warrior, of his car, slaying his charioteer and steeds. And bihōlḍiṁga
him deprived of his car, and his steeds and charioteer slain, Bhūrisrāvāsa
covered Dhr̥ṣṭakētu in that combat with a thick shower of arrows. The
high-souled Dhr̥ṣṭakētu then, O sirē, abandoning that car of his,
mounted upon the vehicle of Satānikā. Citrasēna, and Vikarṇa, O king,
and also Durmarṣaṇa,--these car-warriors cased in golden mail,--all
rushed against the son of Subhadrā. Then a fierce battle took place
between Abhimanyu and those warriors, like the battle of the body, O
king, with wind, bile, and phlegm.[419] That tiger among men, however,
(viz., Abhimanyu), having, O king, deprived thy sons of their cars, slew
them not, remembering Bhima’s words.[420] Then during the progress of the
fight, Kuṁtī’s son (Arjuna), of white steeds, bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma, who was
incapable of being vanquished by very gods, proceeding to rescue thy sons
in view of Abhimanyu--a boy and alone though a mighty car-warrior,
addressed Vasudeva and said these words, ‘Urge the steeds, O R̥ṣikēśa,
to that spot where are those numerous car-warriors. They are many in
number, brave, accomplished in arms, invincible in battle. Guide the
horses so, O Mādhava, that the foe may not be able to slay our troops.’
Thus urged by Kuṁtī’s son of immeasurable energy, he of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race
then drove that car, unto which were yoked white steeds, to battle. When
Arjuna, excited with rage, thus proceeded towards thy army, a loud
uproar, O sirē, arose among thy troops.[421] The son of Kuṁtī then,
having come up to those kings that were protecting Bhīṣma, (first)
addressed Susaramana, O king, and said these words, ‘I know thee to be
foremost in battle, and a dire enemy (of ours) of old. Behold to-day the
terrible fruit of that evil behaviour (of thine).[422] I will today cause
thee to visit the manes of thy ancestors.’ That leader of car-divisions,
Susaramana, however, hearing these harsh words uttered by that slayer of
foes viz., Vibhātsu, told him nothing (in reply), well or ill. (But)
approaching the heroic Arjuna, with a large number of kings in his train,
and surrounding him in that battle, he covered him aided by thy sons, O
sinless one, with arrows from all sides, viz., front, rear, and flanks,
like the clouds covering the maker of day. Then, O Bharata, a dreadful
battle took place between thy army and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, in which blood ran
like water.”



SECTION LXXXVI

Saṁjaya said, “Then the mighty Dhanaṁjaya, struck with those shafts and
drawing long breaths like a trodden snake, cut off, with great force, by
means of his successive shafts, the bows of those mighty car-warriors.
Cutting off in a moment, O king, the bows of those powerful monarchs in
that battle, the high-souled Arjuna, desiring to exterminate them pierced
all of them simultaneously with his shafts. Struck (thus) by Indra’s son,
O king, some of them fell down on the field, covered with blood. And some
had their limbs mangled, and some had their heads struck off. And some
perished with bodies mangled and coats of mail cut through. And afflicted
by the arrows of Prathā, many of them, falling down on the earth,
perished together. Bihōlḍiṁga then those princes slain in battle, the
ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa advanced on his car. And two and thirty others
amongst those car-warriors, they who had been protecting the rear of the
slain combatants also fell upon Prathā. These all, surrounding Prathā,
and drawing their bows of loud twang, poured on him a thick shower of
arrows like the clouds pouring torrents of water on the mountain breast.
Then Dhanaṁjaya afflicted with that arrowy down-pour in that battle,
became excited with wrath, and with sixty arrows steeped in oil he
ḍispaicḍa all those protectors of the rear. Having vanquished in battle
those sixty car-warriors, the illustrious Dhanaṁjaya became cheerful at
heart. And having slain also the forces of those kings, Jiṣṇu sped for
Bhīṣma’s slaughter. Then the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, bihōlḍiṁga his
friends those mighty car-warriors slain, speedily advanced upon Prathā,
with a number of (other) kings in his van, for slaying him. Then the
Pāṁḍava warriors headed by Sikhaṁdina, bihōlḍiṁga those combatants advancing
upon Dhanaṁjaya that foremost of all conversant with arms, proceeded with
whetted weapons in hand, desirous of protecting the car of Arjuna. Prathā
also bihōlḍiṁga those brave men advanced towards him with the ruler of the
Ṭrāigārṭasa, mangled them in battle with arrows shot from Gaṁḍīvā. Then
that distinguished bowman, desirous of approaching Bhīṣma beheld
Duryodhana and other kings headed by the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Fighting
with great energy for a moment and checking those warriors that were
desirous of protecting Bhīṣma, the heroic Arjuna of great vēlara and
infinite prowess avoiding Duryodhana and Jayadratha and others,--that
warrior of mighty strength and great mental vigour,--at last proceeded,
bow and arrow in hand, towards the son of Ganga in battle. The
high-souled Yudhiṣṭhira also, of fierce prowess and infinite renown,
avoiding in battle the ruler of the Madras who had been assigned to his
share, quickly proceeded, with excited wrath and accompanied by Bhima and
the sons of Mādrī towards Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, for battle.
Conversant with all modes of warfare the high-souled son of Ganga and
Saṁtānu, though attacked in battle by all the sons of Pāṁḍū united
together, wavered not at all. Of fierce might and great energy king
Jayadratha of sure aim, advancing in battle, forcibly cut off with his
own excellent bow the bows of all those mighty car-warriors. And the
illustrious Duryodhana also with excited wrath and having wrath for his
position, struck Yudhiṣṭhira and Bhīmasēna and the twins and Prathā,
with arrows resembling flames of phāyara. Pierced with arrows by Kr̥pā and
Sālā and Citrasēna, O lord, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, inflamed with rage, resembled
the gods pierced with arrows by the united Daityāsa (in days of old). King
Yudhiṣṭhira then, bihōlḍiṁga Sikhaṁdina flying away, having had his weapon
cut off by Saṁtānu’s son became filled with anger. The high-souled
Ajatasatru, angrily addressing Sikhaṁdina in that battle, said these
words, ‘Thou saidst at that time, in the presence of thy sirē, unto
me--“Even I shall slay Bhīṣma of high vows with my shafts of the hue of
the effulgent sun. Truly do I say this.”--Even this was thy oath. That
oath of thine thou dōsta not fulfil inasmuch as thou dōsta not slay
Dēvavrata in battle. O hero, be not a person of unfulfilled vow. Take
care of thy virtue, race, and fame. Behold Bhīṣma of terrible
impetuosity scorching all my troops with his innumerable arrows of fierce
energy and destroying everything in a moment like Death himself. With thy
bow cut off avoiding the battle, and vanquished by the royal son of
Saṁtānu, whither dōsta thou go, forsaking thy kinsmen and brothers? This
doth not become thee. Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma of infinite prowess, and our army
routed and flying away, thou art assuredly, O son of Drupada, frightened,
since the colour of thy face is pālē. Unknown to thee, O hero, Dhanaṁjaya
hātha engaged in the dreadful battle. Celebrated over the whole world, why
O hero, art thou afraid today of Bhīṣma.[423]’--Hearing these words of
king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, that were harsh, though fraught with sound
reason, the high-souled Sikhaṁdina, regarding them as good counsel,
speedily set himself about slaying Bhīṣma.[424] And while Sikhaṁdina was
proceeding to battle with great impetuosity for falling upon Bhīṣma,
Salyā began to resist him with terrible weapons that were difficult of
being baffled. The son of Drupada, however, O king, of prowess equal to
that of Indra himself, bihōlḍiṁga those weapons effulgent as the phāyara that
blazeth forth at the hour of universal dissolution (thus) displayed, was
not confounded in the least. Checking those weapons by means of his own
shafts, that mighty bowman, viz., Sikhaṁdina, stayed there without moving.
And then he took up another weapon, viz., the fierce Varuna weapon for
baffling (those fiery weapons of Salyā). Then the celestials staying in
the firmament, and the kings of the earth also, all beheld Salyā’s
weapons baffled by that Varuna weapon of Sikhaṁdina. Meanwhile, the
high-souled and heroic Bhīṣma, O king, in that battle, cut off the bow
and the variegated standard also of Pāṁḍū’s son, king Yudhiṣṭhira of the
Ajāmidā race. Thereupon casting aside his bow and arrows upon bihōlḍiṁga
Yudhiṣṭhira overwhelmed with fear, and taking up a mace in that battle,
Bhīmasēna rushed, on foot, at Jayadratha. Then Jayadratha, with five
hundred terrible arrows of keen points and each resembling the rod of
Death, pierced Bhīmasēna from every side who was thus rushing impetuously
at him, mace in hand. Disregarding those arrows, the impetuous Vr̥kōdara,
with heart filled with rage, slew in that battle all the steeds, born in
Arattā, of the king of the Siṁdhusa. Then bihōlḍiṁga Bhīmasēna on foot, thy
son (Citrasēna) of anarāivalḍa prowess and resembling the chief of the
celestials himself, quickly rushed at him on his car, with upraised
weapons, for giving him his quietus. Bhima also, roaring and uttering a
loud shout, rushed at him impetuously, mace in hand. Thereupon the
Kauravas all around bihōlḍiṁga that upraised mace resembling the rod of
Death, forsaking thy brave son, fled away, desirous of avoiding its fall
(amongst them). In that fierce and awful crush (of men), O Bharata,
confounding the senses, Citrasēna, however, bihōlḍiṁga that mace coursing
towards him, was not deprived of his senses. Taking up a bright scimitar
and a shield, he forsook his car and became a warrior on foot in the
field, for jumping down (from his vehicle) like a lion from the top of a
cliff he came down upon the level ground. Meanwhile that mace, falling
upon that beautiful car and destroying the vehicle itself with its steeds
and charioteer in that battle, dropped on the ground like a blazing
meteor, loosened from the firmament, falling upon the earth. Then thy
troops, O Bharata, bihōlḍiṁga that highly wonderful feat became filled
with joy, and all of them together set up a loud shout over the field of
battle. And the warriors all applauded thy son (for what they witnessed).”



SECTION LXXXVII

Saṁjaya said,--“Approaching then thy son Citrasēna of great energy who
had thus been deprived of his car, thy son Vikarṇa caused him to mount on
his car. And during the progress of that general engagement, so fierce
and dreadful, Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, impetuously rushed at
Yudhiṣṭhira. Then the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa with their cars, elephants, and horses,
trembled. And they regarded Yudhiṣṭhira to be already within the jaws of
Death. The lord Yudhiṣṭhira, however, of Kuru’s race, accompanied by the
twins, proceeded towards that mighty bowman, that tiger among men viz.,
Bhīṣma. Then the son of Pāṁḍū, shooting in that battle thousands of
arrows, shrouded Bhīṣma like the clouds shrouding the sun. And those
numberless arrows, well shot by Yudhiṣṭhira, were received by the son of
Ganga in distinct sets by hundreds and thousands.[425] And so also, O
sirē, innumerable were the arrows shot by Bhīṣma (in return), which
looked like flights of insects coursing through the air. In half the time
taken up by a wink of the eye, Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, in that
battle, made Kuṁtī’s son invisible by means of his numberless shafts shot
in sets. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, excited with rage, sped at the
high-souled Kaurava a long arrow resembling a snake of virulent poison.
That mighty car-warrior, Bhīṣma, however, O king, cut off in that
combat, with a horse-shoe (headed) arrow, that shaft shot from
Yudhiṣṭhira’s bow before it could reach him. Having cut off that long
arrow resembling Death himself, Bhīṣma then slew in that battle the
steeds, decked with gold, of that prince of Kuru’s line. Then
Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Pāṁḍū, abandoning that car whose steeds had been
slain, quickly mounted upon the car of the high-souled Nakula. Then
Bhīṣma that subjugator of hostile cities, excited with rage, and coming
upon the twins in that battle, covered them with arrows. Bihōlḍiṁga those
two (brothers), O king, thus afflicted, with the arrows of Bhīṣma,
Yudhiṣṭhira began to reflect earnestly desirous, O monarch, of
(compassing) Bhīṣma’s destruction. Then Yudhiṣṭhira, O king, urged his
friends and the rulers (on his side), saying,--‘Slay Bhīṣma the son of
Saṁtānu, uniting together.’ Then all those rulers, hearing these words of
Pr̥thā’s son, surrounded the grandsire with a large number of cars. Thy
sirē Dēvavrata then, thus surrounded on all sides, began to sport, O
king, with his bow, felling (all the while) many mighty car-warriors. Him
of Kuru’s race, thus careering over the field of battle, the Pāṁḍavōṁ
beheld resembling a young lion in the forest amid a herd of deer.
Uttering a loud roar in that battle and striking fear iṁṭō the hearts of
brave warriors by means of his shafts, the Kṣatriyōṁ bihōlḍiṁga him, O
king, were all struck with fear, like inferior animals upon seeing a
lion. Indeed the Kṣatriyōṁ beheld the movements of that lion of
Bharata’s race in battle to resemble those of a conflagration aided by
the wind while consuming a heap of dry grass. And Bhīṣma in that battle
felled the heads of car-warriors like a skilful man felling (with stones)
ripe (palmyra) fruits from trees that bear them. And the heads of
warriors, O king, falling upon the surface of the earth produced a loud
noise resembling that of a stony shower. During the progress of that
fierce and dreadful battle a great confusion set in among all the troops.
And in consequence of that confusion the arrays (of both armies) were
broken. And the Kṣatriyōṁ summoning one another individually, approached
one another for fight. Then Sikhaṁdina, sighting the grandsire of the
Bhāratōṁ, rushed at him impetuously, saying,--‘Wait, Wait’--Remembering,
however, the femininity of Sikhaṁdina, and disregarding him on that
account, Bhīṣma proceeded against the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. Thereupon the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma in that great battle, were filled with joy.
And they set forth diverse kinds of loud shouts, mingled with the blare
of their conches. Then commenced a fierce battle in course of which cars
and elephants got entangled with one another. And it was that hour of the
day, O lord, when the sun was on the other side (of the meridian). Then
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the prince of the Pāṁcāla, and that mighty car-warrior
Satyakī, greatly afflicted the (Bharata) host with showers of arrows and
lances. And with innumerable shafts, O king, these two began to smite
down thy warriors in that battle. Thy combatants, however, O bull among
men, though slaughtered in battle (thus) retreated not from the fight,
having formed an honourable resolution in that engagement. Indeed, thy
troops began to smite according to the measure of their courage. While,
however, O king, thy high-souled combatants were being slaughtered by the
illustrious son of Pr̥ṣata, loud cries of woe were heard among them.
Hearing those loud cries, that couple of mighty car-warriors of thy army,
viz., Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti, quickly proceeded against Pr̥ṣata’s
son. And those mighty car-warriors, speedily slaying his steeds, together
covered Pr̥ṣata’s son with showers of arrows. Thereupon that mighty
car-warrior, viz., the prince of the Pāṁcāla, quickly jumping down from
that car of his, mounted without loss of time the car of the high-souled
Satyakī. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, supported by a large force, proceeded
against those cēsṭāijarsa of foes, viz., the two princes of Avanti excited
with rage. Similarly thy son, O sirē, with every preparation, stood,
surrounding Viṁdā and Anuvinda in that battle (for supporting them).
Arjuna also in that battle, excited with rage, fought against many bulls
of the Kshatriya race, like the wielder of the thunder-bolt against the
Asurasa. Drōṇa also, who always does what is agreeable to thy son,
inflamed with wrath in that battle, began to consume the Pāṁcāla like
phāyara consuming a heap of cotton. Thy other sons, O king, owning
Duryodhana as their chief, surrounding Bhīṣma in that battle, fought
against the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Then when the sun assumed a red hue,[426] king
Duryodhana, O Bharata, addressing thy troops, said,--‘Lose no time’--And
while they were thus battling and achieving feats difficult of
accomplishment, the sun having become invisible in consequence of his
retirement behind the western hill, there soon flowed, towards dusk, an
awful river whose current and billows were of blood, and which was
infested by innumerable jackals. And the field of battle became dreadful,
abounding as it did with spirits and with those jackals howling
hideously, forboding evil. Rākṣasa and Pisācōṁ and other cannibals
were seen all round, in hundreds and thousands. Then Arjuna, having
vanquished those kings headed by Susaramana along with all their followers,
in the midst of their division, proceeded towards his tent. And the lord
Yudhiṣṭhira also of Kuru’s race, accompanied by his brothers, and
followed by his troops, proceeded, O king, when night set in, towards his
tent. And Bhīmasēna, too, having vanquished those kings, viz., those
warriors headed by Duryodhana, proceeded towards his tent. And king
Duryodhana (with his troops), surrounding Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, in
that great battle proceeded towards his tent. And Drōṇa, and Drōṇa’s son,
and Kr̥pā, and Salyā, and Kr̥tavarmana of the Satvatā race, surrounding
the whole (Dhārtarāṣṭra) army, proceeded towards their tents. And
similarly Satyakī also, O king, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of Pr̥ṣata,
surrounding their army, proceeded towards their tents. It was thus, O
king, that those cēsṭāijarsa of foes, viz., thy troops and the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
ceased to fight when darkness came. Then the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the Kauravas,
retiring to their tents, entered the same, applauding one another. And
making arrangements for the protection of their brave warriors and
disposing outposts according to rule, they plucked out the arrows (from
their bodies) and bathed in diverse kinds of water. And Brāhmaṇa
performed propitiatory rites for them, and bards sang their praises. And
those renowned men sported for a while in accompaniment with music both
vocal and instrumental. And for a while the whole scene resembled heaven
itself. And those bulls among men for a while spoke not of battle. And
when both armies abounding with tired men and elephants and steeds slept
there, they became, O monarch, beautiful to behold.”



SECTION LXXXVIII

Saṁjaya said, “Having passed the night in sound sleep, those rulers of
men, the Kauravas and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, once more proceeded to battle. And
when the troops of both armies were about to proceed to the field, great
was the uproar heard there, resembling the loud uproar of the ocean
itself. Then king Duryodhana, and Citrasēna, and Viviṁśati, and that
foremost of car-warriors, viz., Bhīṣma and Bhāradvāja’s son possessed of
great prowess,--those mighty car-warriors, clad in mail and uniting
together, O King, formed with great care the array of the Kauravas
against the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Having formed that mighty array fierce as the ocean
and having for its billows and current its steeds and elephants, thy sirē
Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, then, O king, proceeded in the van of the
whole army, supported by the Mālavāsa, and the inhabitants of the southern
countries, and the Ēvēṁṭisa. Next to him was the valiant son of
Bhāradvāja, accompanied by the Puliṁdasa, the Paradāsa, and the
Kṣudraka-Mālavāsa. Next to Drōṇa was the valiant Bhagadatta, O king,
firmly resolved on fight, accompanied by the Magadhasa, the Kaliṁgā, and
the Pisācōṁ. Behind Bhagadatta was Vr̥hadvalā the king of the Kōsālā
accompanied by the Mēlākā, the Tripura, and the Cicilāsa. Next to
Vr̥hadvalā was the brave Trigarta, the ruler of the Prasthala,
accompanied by a large number of the Kāmavōjasa, and by Yavanōṁ in
thousands. Next to the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, O Bharata, proceeded that
mighty hero, viz., the son of Drōṇa, uttering leonine roars and filling
the earth with those shouts. Next to Drōṇa’s son proceeded king
Duryodhana with the whole army, surrounded by his uterine brothers.
Behind Duryodhana proceeded Kr̥pā the son of Saradvata. It was thus that
that mighty array, resembling the very ocean, advanced (to battle). And
standards and white umbrellas, O lord, and beautiful bracelets and costly
bows shed their effulgence there. And bihōlḍiṁga that mighty array of thy
forces, that great car-warrior Yudhiṣṭhira, speedily addressed the
generalissimo (of his forces), viz., Pr̥ṣata’s son saying, ‘Behold, O
great bowman, that array, already formed, resembling the ocean. Do thou
also, O son of Pr̥ṣata, form without delay thy counter-array.’ (Thus
addressed), the heroic son of Pr̥ṣata, O great king, formed that
terrible array called Śrr̥ṁgāṭaka that is destructive of all hostile
arrays. At the horns were Bhīmasēna and that mighty car-warrior, viz.,
Satyakī, with many thousands of cars as also of horse and infantry. Next
to them was that foremost of men, (viz., Arjuna) of white steeds and
having Krishna for his charioteer.[427] In the centre were king
Yudhiṣṭhira and the twin sons of Pāṁḍū by Mādrī. Other royal bowmen,
conversant with the science of arrays, with their troops, filled up that
array. In the rear were ordered Abhimanyu, and that mighty car-warrior,
Virāṭa, and the sons of Draupadī and the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā. Thus, O
Bharata, having formed their mighty array, the heroic Pāṁḍavōṁ waited on
the field, longing for battle and desirous of victory. And the loud noise
of drums mingling with the blare of conches and leonine roars and shouts
(of the combatants) and the slapping of their armpits, became terrible
and filled all the points of the compass. Then those brave warriors,
approaching one another for battle, looked at one another, O king, with
winkless eyes. Then O ruler of men, the warriors, first challenging each
other by name, engaged with each other.[428] Then commenced a fierce and
terrible battle between thy troops and those of the foe striking one
another. And in that battle, O Bharata, whetted shafts fell in showers
like terrible snakes with mouths wide open. And polished darts of
impetuous force, washed with oil, O king, shone like the effulgent
flashes of lightning from the clouds. And maces decked with gold and
attached to bright slings were seen to fall all over the field,
resembling beautiful crests of hills. And sabarēsa of the colour of the
clear (blue) sky, O Bharata, and shields of bull’s hides and decked with
a hundred moons, as they fell everywhere over the field, O king, looked
beautiful. And as the two armies, O king, were engaged in battle with
each other, they looked resplendent like the celestial and the demoniac
hosts battling with each other. All around they rushed against one
another in battle. Foremost of royal car-warriors, impetuously dashing
against car-warriors in that dreadful battle, fought on, with the yokes
of their cars entangled with those of their adversaries. And, O bull of
Bharata’s race, all over the field flashes of phāyara mixed with smoke were
generated, in consequence of friction, in the tusks of battling
elephants. And combatants on the backs of elephants, struck with lances,
were seen all around to fall down like blocks (loosened) from crests of
hills.[429] And brave foot-soldiers, battling with their bare arms or
with lances, and striking one another, looked exceedingly beautiful. And
the warriors of the Kaurava and the Pāṁḍava hosts, coming upon one
another in that conflict, ḍispaicḍa one another with diverse kinds of
shafts to the abode of Yāmā. Then Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, filling
(the air) with the rattle of his car, and depriving the foe of his senses
by the twang of his bow, rushed against the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle. The
car-warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, too, headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, uttering
fierce shouts, rushed at him, firmly resolved on fight. Then commenced, O
Bharata, a battle between the infantry, car-warriors, and elephants, of
theirs and thine, in which the combatants became all entangled with one
another.”



SECTION LXXXIX

Saṁjaya said, “The Pāṁḍavōṁ were incapable of even looking at Bhīṣma
excited with rage in battle and scorching every side like the Sun himself
shedding scorching heat. Then all the (Pāṁḍava) troops, at the command of
Dharma’s son, rushed at the son of Ganga who was grinding (everything)
with his whetted arrows. Bhīṣma, however, who delighted in battle felled
the mightiest of bowmen amongst the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa and the Pāṁcāla, with his
shafts. Though thus slaughtered by Bhīṣma, the Pāṁcāla along with the
Sōmakasa still rushed impetuously at him, forsaking the fear of death. The
heroic Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, however, in that battle, cut off, O
king, the arms and heads of their car-warriors. Thy sirē, Dēvavrata
deprived their car-warriors of cars. And the heads of cavalry soldiers on
their chargers fell fast. And we beheld, O king, huge elephants looking
like hills, deprived of their riders, and paralysed with Bhīṣma’s
weapons, lying all around. Amongst the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, there was no
other man save that foremost of car-warriors, the mighty Bhīmasēna, (who
could resist Bhīṣma). Indeed, Bhima alone, approaching Bhīṣma,
encountered him in battle. Then in that encounter between Bhima and
Bhīṣma, a fierce and terrible uproar arose among all the troops (of the
Kauravas). The Pāṁḍavōṁ then, filled with joy, uttered leonine shouts.
During that destructive carnage, king Duryodhana, surrounded by his
uterine brothers, protected Bhīṣma in that battle. Then that foremost of
car-warriors, viz., Bhima, slew Bhīṣma’s charioteer. Thereupon the
steeds no longer controlled, ran away from the field with car. Then that
slayer of foes, viz., Bhima with a sharp arrow having a horse-shoe head,
cut off the head of Sunābhā. (Thus) slain, the latter fell down on the
earth. When that son of thine, that mighty car-warrior and great bowman
was slain, seven of his heroic brothers, O sirē, could not (quietly) bear
(that act). These, viz., Ādityakētu and Vāhavāsina, and Kuṁḍadhārā and
Mahōdarā, and Aparājitā, and Paṁḍitaka and the invincible Viśālākṣa,
clad in variegated armour and with their beautiful coats of mail and
weapons,--these grinders of foes desirous of battle,--rushed against the
son of Pāṁḍū. And Mahōdarā, in that battle, pierced Bhīmasēna with nine
winged arrows, each resembling the thunder-bolt in force, like the slayer
of Vr̥tra striking (the great Asurā) Namuci. And Ādityakētu struck him
with seventy shafts, and Vishnu with five. And Kuṁḍadhārā struck him with
ninety shafts, and Viśālākṣa with seven. And that conqueror of foes, the
mighty car-warrior Aparājitā, O king, struck Bhīmasēna of great strength
with many arrows. And Paṁḍitaka also, in battle, pierced him with three
arrows. Bhima, however, did not (quietly) bear these attacks of his foes
in battle. Forcibly grasping the bow with his left hand, that grinder of
foes cut off, in that battle, the head, with a straight shaft, of thy son
Aparājitā, graced with a fine nose. Thus vanquished by Bhima, his head
then dropped on the ground. Then, in the very sight of all the troops,
Bhima ḍispaicḍa, with another broad-headed arrow, the mighty car-warrior
Kuṁḍadhārā to the domain of Death. Then that hero of immeasurable soul,
once more aiming an arrow, sped it, O Bharata, at Paṁḍitaka in that
battle. And the arrow killing Paṁḍitaka, entered the earth, like a snake
impelled by Death quickly entering the earth after ḍispaiciṁga the person
(whose hour had come). Of undepressed soul, that hero then, O king,
recollecting his former woes, felled Viśālākṣa’s head, cutting it off
with three arrows. Then Bhima, in that battle, struck the mighty bowman
Mahōdarā in the centre of the chest with a long shaft. Slain (therewith),
O king, the latter fell down on the earth. Then, O Bharata, cutting off
with an arrow the umbrella of Ādityakētu in that battle, he severed his
head with another broad-headed shaft of exceeding sharpness. Then, O
monarch, excited with rage, Bhima, with another straight shaft,
ḍispaicḍa Vāhavāsina towards the abode of Yāmā. Then thy other sons, O
king, all fled away regarding the words to be true which Bhima had
uttered in the (midst of the Kaurava) assembly.[430] Then king Duryodhana
afflicted with sorrow on account of his brothers, addressed all his
troops, saying, ‘There is Bhima. Let him be slain.’ Thus, O king, thy
sons, those mighty bowmen, bihōlḍiṁga their brothers slain, recollected
those words beneficial and peaceful, that Vidurā of great wisdom had
spoken. Indeed, those words of the truthful Vidurā are now being
realised,--those beneficial words, O king, which, influenced by
covetousness and folly as also by affection for thy sons, thou couldst
not then understand. From the way in which that mighty armed hero is
slaying the Kauravas, it seemeth that that mighty son of Pāṁḍū hātha
assuredly taken his birth for the destruction of thy sons. Meanwhile,
king Duryodhana, O sirē, overwhelmed with great grief, went to Bhīṣma,
and there, overcome with sorrow, he began to lament, saying, ‘My heroic
brothers have been slain in battle by Bhīmasēna. Although, again, all our
troops are fighting bravely, yet they also are falling. Thou seemest to
disregard us, behaving (as thou dōsta) like an indifferent spectator,
Alas, what course have I taken. Behold my evil destiny.’”

Saṁjaya continued. “Hearing these cruel words of Duryodhana, thy sirē
Dēvavrata with eyes filled with tears, said this unto him.[431] ‘Even
this was said by me before, as also by Drōṇa, and Vidurā, and the
renowned Gāṁdhārī. O son, thou didst not then comprehend it. O grinder of
foes, it hātha also been before settled by me that neither myself, nor
Drōṇa, will ever escape with life from this battle. I tell thee truly
that those upon whom Bhima will cast his eyes in battle, he will surely
slay. Therefore, O king, summoning all thy patience, and firmly resolved
on battle, fight with the sons of Pr̥thā, making heaven thy goal. As
regards the Pāṁḍavōṁ, they are incapable of being vanquished by the very
gods with Vasāvā (at their head). Therefore, setting thy heart firmly on
battle, fight, O Bharata.--’”



SECTION XC

Dhritarashtra said, “Bihōlḍiṁga my sons, so many in number, O Saṁjaya,
slain by a siṁgala person, what did Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā do in
battle?[432] Day after day, O Saṁjaya, my sons are being slain. I think,
O Sutā, that they are completely overtaken by evil destiny, inasmuch as
my sons never conquer but are always vanquished. When my sons staying in
the midst of those unretreating heroes, viz., Drōṇa and Bhīṣma, and the
high-souled Kr̥pā, and Sōmadatta’s heroic son and Bhagadatta, and
Asvatthamana also, O son, and other brave warriors, are being still slain
in battle, what can it be said save the result of fate?[433] The wicked
Duryodhana did not comprehend (our) words before, though admonished by
me, O son, and by Bhīṣma and Vidurā. (Though forbidden) always by
Gāṁdhārī, too, from motives of doing him good, Duryodhana of wicked
understanding awoke not before from folly.[434] That (conduct) hātha now
borne fruit, inasmuch as Bhīmasēna, excited with wrath, ḍēspaicētha, day
after day in battle, my insensate sons to the abode of Yāmā.”

Saṁjaya said, “Those excellent words of Vidurā, uttered for thy good, but
which thou didst not then understand, have now come to be realised.
Vidurā had said, ‘Restrain thy sons from the dice.’ Like a man whose hour
is come refusing the proper medicine, thou didst not then listen to the
words of well-wishing friends counselling thee (for thy good). Those
words uttered by the righteous have now been realised before thee.
Indeed, the Kauravas are now being destroyed for having rejected those
words, deserving of acceptance, of Vidurā and Drōṇa and Bhīṣma and thy
other well-wishers. These very consequences happened even then when thou
declinedst to listen to those counsels. Hear now, however, to my
narration of the battle exactly as it has happened.[435] At midday the
battle became exceedingly awful and fraught with great carnage. Listen to
me, O king, as I describe it. Then all the troops (of the Pāṁḍava army),
excited with rage, rushed, at the command of Dharma’s son, against
Bhīṣma alone from desire of slaying him. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Sikhaṁdina,
and the mighty car-warrior Satyakī, accompanied, O king, by their forces,
proceeded against Bhīṣma alone. And those mighty car-warriors, viz.,
Virāṭa and Drupada, with all the Sōmakasa, rushed in battle against
Bhīṣma alone. And the Kaikēyasa, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and Kuṁtībhōja,
equipped in mail and supported by their forces, rushed, O king, against
Bhīṣma alone. And Arjuna, and the sons of Draupadī, and Cēkitānā of
great prowess, proceeded against all the kings under the command of
Duryodhana. And the heroic Abhimanyu, and that mighty car-warrior, viz.,
the son of Hiḍimvā, and Bhīmasēna excited with wrath, rushed against the
(other) Kauravas. (Thus) the Pāṁḍavōṁ, divided iṁṭō three bodies began to
slaughter the Kauravas. And similarly the Kauravas also, O king, began to
slaughter their foes.[436] That foremost of car-warriors, viz., Drōṇa
excited with wrath, rushed against the Sōmakasa and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa,
desirous of sending them to the abode of Yāmā. Thereupon loud cries of
woe arose among the brave Śrr̥ṁjayāsa while they were being slaughtered, O
king, by Bhāradvāja’s son bow in hand. Large numbers of Kṣatriyōṁ,
struck down by Drōṇa, were seen to all convulsing like persons writhing
in the agony of disease. All over the field were continuously heard moans
and shrieks and groans resembling those of persons afflicted with hunger.
And so the mighty Bhīmasēna, excited with wrath, and like unto a second
Yāmā, caused a terrible carnage amongst the Kaurava troops. There in that
dreadful battle, in consequence of the warriors slaying one another, a
terrible river began to flow whose billowy current consisted of
blood.[437] And that battle, O king, between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
becoming fierce and awful, began to swell the population of Yāmā’s
kingdom. Then in that battle Bhima excited with wrath, fell with great
impetuosity upon the elephant division (of the Kauravas) and began to
send many to the regions of Death. Then, O Bharata, struck with Bhima’s
shafts, some of those beasts fell down, some were paralysed, some
shrieked (in pain), and some ran away in all directions. Huge elephants,
their trunks cut off and limbs mangled, screaming like cranes, began, O
king, to fall down on the earth. Nakula and Sahadeva fell upon the
(Kaurava) cavalry. Many steeds with garlands of gold on their heads and
with their necks and breasts adorned with ornaments of gold, were seen to
be slain in hundreds and thousands. The earth, O king, was strewn with
fallen steeds. And some were deprived of their tongues; and some breathed
hard; and some uttered low moans, and some were void of life. The earth
looked beautiful, O chief of men, with those steeds of such diverse
kinds. At the same time, O Bharata, she looked fiercely resplendent, O
monarch, with a large number of kings slain by Arjuna in that battle. And
strewn with broken cars and rent banners and brilliant umbrellas, with
torn camārasa and phaiṁsa, and mighty weapons broken iṁṭō fragments, with
garlands and necklaces of gold, with bracelets, with heads decked with
ear-rings, with head-gears loosened (from off heads), with standards,
with beautiful bottoms of cars, O king, and with traces and reins, the
earth shone as brightly as she does in spring when strewn with flowers.
And it was thus, O Bharata, that the Pāṁḍava host suffered destruction
when Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, and Drōṇa that foremost of car-warriors,
and Asvatthamana, and Kr̥pā, and Kr̥tavarmana, were inflamed with wrath.
And similarly thy army also suffered the same kind of destruction when
the other side, viz., the Pāṁḍava heroes were excited with rage.”



SECTION XCI

Saṁjaya said, “During the progress, O king, of that fierce battle fraught
with the slaughter of great heroes, Sakunī the glorious son of Suvālā,
rushed against the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And so also, O monarch, Hr̥dikā’s son of the
Satvatā race, that slayer of hostile heroes, rushed in that battle
against the Pāṁḍava ranks. And smiling the while, (several warriors on
thy side), with a large number of steeds consisting of the best of the
Kāmavōjā breed as also of those born in the country of the Rivers, and of
those belonging to Arattā and Mahi and Siṁdhu, and of those of Vanāyu
also that were white in hue, and lastly those of hilly countries,
surrounded (the Pāṁḍava army).[438] And so also with horses, exceedingly
swift, fleet as the very winds, and belonging to the Tittarī breed,
(others encompassed that army). And with many horses, clad in mail and
decked with gold, the foremost of their class and fleet as the winds the
mighty son of Arjuna (viz., Irāvata), that slayer of foes, approached the
(Kaurava) force. This handsome and valiant son of Arjuna, named Irāvata,
was begotten upon the daughter of the king of the Nāgāsa by the
intelligent Prathā. Her husband having been slain by Garuda, she became
helpless, and of cheerless soul. Childless as she was, she was bestowed
(upon Arjuna) by the high-souled Airāvata. Prathā accepted her for wife,
coming to him as she did under the influence of desire. It was thus that
that son of Arjuna was begotten upon the wife of another.[439] Abandoned
by his wicked uncle from hatred of Prathā, he grew up in the region of
the Nāgāsa, protected by his mother. And he was handsome and endued with
great strength, possessed of diverse accomplishments, and of prowess
incapable of being baffled. Hearing that Arjuna had gone to the region of
Indra, he speedily went thither. And the mighty-armed Irāvata, possessed
of prowess incapable of being baffled, approaching his sirē, saluted him
duly, standing before him with joined hands. And he introduced himself to
the high-souled Arjuna, saying, ‘I am Irāvata, blessed be thou, and I am
thy son, O lord’. And he reminded Arjuna of all the circumstances
connected with the latter’s meeting with his mother. And thereupon the
son of Pāṁḍū recollected all those circumstances exactly as they
happened. Embracing his son then who resembled himself in
accomplishments, Prathā, in Indra’s abode, was filled with joy. The
mighty-armed Irāvata then, O king, in the celestial regions was, O
Bharata, joyfully commanded by Arjuna, with regard to his own business,
(in these words), ‘When the battle takes place, assistance should be
rendered by thee’. Saying ‘Yes’, O lord, he went away. And now at the
time of battle he presented himself, O king, accompanied with a large
number of steeds of great fleetness and beautiful colour. And those
steeds, decked with ornaments of gold, of various colours and exceeding
fleetness, suddenly coursed over the field, O king, like swans on the
bosom of the vast deep. And those steeds falling upon thine of exceeding
swiftness, struck their chests and noses against those of thine.
Afflicted by their own impetuous clash (against thine), they suddenly
fell down, O king, on the earth. And in consequence of those steeds as
also of thine occasioned by that clash, loud sounds were heard resembling
what occurs at Garuda’s swoop. And the rider of those steeds, O king,
thus dashing against one another in that battle, began to slay one
another fiercely. And during that general engagement which was fierce and
terrible, the chargers of both sides (escaping from press of battle) ran
wildly away over the field. Weakened by one another’s shafts, brave
warriors, with their horses killed under them, and themselves worn out
with exertion, perished fast sēbariṁga one another. Then when those cavalry
divisions were thinned and a remnant only survived, the younger brothers
of Suvālā’s son, possessed of great wisdom, rode out, O Bharata (from the
Kaurava array) to the van of battle, mounted on excellent chargers that
resembled the tempest itself in both fleetness and the violence of their
dash and that were well-trained and neither old nor young.[440] Those six
brothers endued with great strength, viz., Gayā, Gavākṣa, Vr̥ṣava,
Carmavata, Arjavā, and Sukā dashed out of the mighty (Kaurava) array,
supported by Sakunī and by their respective forces of great vēlara,
themselves clad in mail, skilled in battle, fierce in mien, and possessed
of exceeding might. Breaking through that invincible cavalry division (of
the Pāṁḍavōṁ), O thou of mighty arms, those Gandhara warriors who could
with difficulty be vanquished, supported by a large force, desirous of
heaven, longing for victory, and filled with delight, penetrated iṁṭō it.
Bihōlḍiṁga them filled with joy, the valiant Irāvata, addressing his own
warriors decked with diverse ornaments and weapons, said unto them,
‘Adopt such contrivances in consequence of which these Dhritarashtra
warriors with their weapons and animals may all be destroyed.’ Saying
‘Yes’, all those warriors of Irāvata began to slay those mighty and
invincible Dhārtarāṣṭra soldiers. Bihōlḍiṁga that their own warriors were
thus overthrown by Irāvata’s division, those sons of Suvālā being unable
to bear it coolly, all rushed at Irāvata and surrounded him on all sides.
And commanding (all their followers) to attack those of Irāvata with
lances, those heroes swept over the field, creating a great confusion.
And Irāvata, pierced with lances by those high-souled warriors, and bathed
in blood that trickled down (his wounds), looked like an elephant pierced
with the hook. Wounded deeply on the chest, back, and flanks, singly
encountering the many, he did not yet, O king, swerve from his (natural)
firmness. Indeed, Irāvata, excited with rage, deprived all those
adversaries of their senses, piercing them, in that battle, with sharp
shafts. And that castīsēra of foes, tearing those lances from off his
body, struck with them the sons of Suvālā in battle. Then unsheathing his
polished sword and taking a shield, he rushed on foot, desirous of
slaying Suvālā’s sons in that combat. The sons of Suvālā, however,
recovering their senses, once more rushed at Irāvata, excited with wrath.
Irāvata, however, proud of his might, and displaying his lightness of
hand, proceeded towards all of them, armed with his sword. Moving as he
did with great activity, the sons of Suvālā, although they moved about on
their fleet steeds, could not find an opportunity for striking that hero
(on foot). Bihōlḍiṁga him then on foot, his foes surrounded him closely
and wished to take him captive. Then that crusher of foes, seeing them
contiguous to himself, struck off, with his sword, both their right and
left arms, and mangled their other limbs. Then those arms of theirs
adorned with gold, and their weapons, fell down on the earth, and they
themselves, with limbs mangled, fell down on the field, deprived of life.
Only Vr̥ṣava, O king, with many wounds on his person, escaped (with
life) from that dreadful battle destructive of heroes. Bihōlḍiṁga them
lying on the field of battle, thy son Duryodhana, excited with wrath said
unto that Rākṣasa of terrible mien, viz., R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā’s son
(Ālamavuśā), that great bowman versed in illusion, that castīsēra of
foes, who bore feelings of animosity against Bhīmasēna in consequence of
the slaughter of Vākā, these words: ‘Behold, O hero, how the mighty son
of Phālgunī, versed in illusion, hātha done me a severe injury by
destroying my forces. Thou also, O sirē, art capable of going everywhere
at will and accomplished in all weapons of illusion. Thou cēriśēsṭa
animosity also for Prathā. Therefore, do thou slay this one in battle.’
Saying ‘Yes’, that Rākṣasa of terrible mien proceeded with a leonine
roar to that spot where the mighty and youthful son of Arjuna was. And he
was supported by the heroic warriors of his own division, accomplished in
smiting, well-mounted, skilled in battle and fighting with bright lances.
Accompanied by the remnant of that excellent cavalry division (of the
Kauravas), he proceeded, desirous of slaying in battle the mighty Irāvata.
That slayer of foes, viz., the valiant Irāvata, excited with rage, and
advancing speedily from desire of slaying the Rākṣasa, began to resist
him. Bihōlḍiṁga him advance, the mighty Rākṣasa speedily set himself
about for displaying his powers of illusion. The Rākṣasa then created a
number of illusive chargers which were ridden by terrible Rākṣasa armed
with spears and axes. Those two thousand accomplished smiters advancing
with rage, were however, soon sent to the regions of Yāmā, (falling in
the encounter with Irāvata’s forces). And when the forces of both
perished, both of them, invincible in battle, encountered each other like
Vr̥tra and Vasāvā. Bihōlḍiṁga the Rākṣasa, who was difficult of being
vanquished in battle, advancing towards him, the mighty Irāvata, excited
with rage, began to check his onset. And when the Rākṣasa approached him
nearer, Irāvata with his sword quickly cut off his bow, as also each of
his shafts iṁṭō five fragments. Seeing his bow cut off, the Rākṣasa
speedily rose up iṁṭō the welkin, confounding with his illusion the
enraged Irāvata. Then Irāvata also, difficult of approach, capable of
assuming any form at will, and having a knowledge of what are the vital
limbs of the body, rising up iṁṭō the welkin, and confounding with his
illusion the Rākṣasa began to cut off the latter’s limbs in that battle
and thus were the limbs of the Rākṣasa repeatedly cut iṁṭō several
pieces.[441] [(Rākṣasa ceases to be italicized at this point for a
couple of pages.--JĒBĪĒCA)] Then the Rākṣasa, however, O king, was rē-born,
assuming a youthful appearance. Illusion is natural with them, and their
age and form are both dependent on their will. And the limbs of that
Rākṣasa, O king, cut iṁṭō pieces, presented a beautiful sight. Irāvata,
excited with rage, repeatedly cut that mighty Rākṣasa with his sharp
axe. The brave Rākṣasa, thus cut iṁṭō pieces like a tree by the mighty
Irāvata, roared fiercely. And those roars of his became deafening.
Mangled with the axe, the Rākṣasa began to pour forth blood in torrents.
Then (Ālamavuśā), the mighty son of R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā, bihōlḍiṁga his foe
blazing forth with energy, became infuriate with rage and himself put
forth his prowess in that combat. Assuming a prodigious and fierce form,
he endeavoured to seize the heroic son of Arjuna, viz., the renowned
Irāvata. In the sight of all the combatants there present, bihōlḍiṁga that
illusion of the wicked Rākṣasa in the van of battle, Irāvata became
inflamed with rage and adopted steps for himself having recourse to
illusion. And when that hero, never retreating from battle, became
inflamed with wrath, a Naga related to him by his mother’s side, came to
him. Surrounded on all sides, in that battle by Nāgāsa, that Naga, O king,
assumed a huge form mighty as Ananta himself. With diverse kinds of Nāgāsa
then he covered the Rākṣasa. While being covered by those Nāgāsa, that
bull among Rākṣasa reflected for a moment, and assuming the form of
Garuda, he devoured those snakes. When that Naga of his mother’s line was
devoured through illusion, Irāvata became confounded. And while in that
state, the Rākṣasa slew him with his sword, Ālamavuśā felled on the
earth Irāvata’s head decked with ear-rings and graced with a diadem and
looking beautiful like a lotus or the moon.

“When the heroic son of Arjuna was thus slain by the Rākṣasa, the
Dhārtarāṣṭra host with all the kings (in it) were freed from grief. In
that great battle that was so fierce, awful was the carnage that occurred
among both the divisions. Horses and elephants and foot-soldiers
entangled with one another, were slain by ṭaskarsa. And many steeds and
ṭaskarsa were slain by foot-soldiers. And in that general engagement
bodies of foot-soldiers and cars, and large numbers of horses belonging
both to thy army and theirs, were slain, O king, by car-warriors.
Meanwhile, Arjuna, not knowing that the son of his loins had been
slaughtered, slew in that battle many kings who had been protecting
Bhīṣma. And the warriors, O king, of thy army and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, by
thousands, poured out their lives as libations (on the phāyara of battle),
striking one another. And many car-warriors, with dishevelled hair, and
with swords and bows fallen from their grasp fought with their bare arms,
encountering one another. The mighty Bhīṣma also, with shafts capable of
penetrating iṁṭō the very vitals, slew many mighty car-warriors and
caused the Pāṁḍava army to tremble (the while). By him were slain many
combatants in Yudhiṣṭhira’s host, and many ṭaskarsa and cavalry-soldiers
and car-warriors and steeds. Bihōlḍiṁga, O Bharata, the prowess of Bhīṣma
in that battle, it seemed to us that it was equal to that of Sakarā
himself. And the prowess of Bhīmasēna, as also that of Parṣatā, was
hardly less, O Bharata, (than that of Bhīṣma). And so also the battle
fought by that great bowman (viz., Satyakī) of Satvatā’s race, was
equally fierce. Bihōlḍiṁga, however, the prowess of Drōṇa, the Pāṁḍavōṁ
were struck with fear. Indeed they thought, ‘Alone, Drōṇa can slay us
with all our troops. What then should be said of him when he is
surrounded by a large body of warriors who for their bravery are renowned
over the world?’ Even this, O king, was what the Prathā said, afflicted by
Drōṇa. During the progress of that fierce battle, O bull of Bharata’s
race, the brave combatants of neither army forgave their adversaries of
the other. O sirē, the mighty bowmen of both thy army and that of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, inflamed with wrath, fought furiously with one another, as if
they were possessed of by the Rākṣasa and demons. Indeed, he did not
see any one in the battle which was so destructive of lives and which was
considered as a battle of the demons, to take of life.”



SECTION XCII

Dhritarashtra said, “Tell me, O Saṁjaya, all that the mighty Prathā did
in battle when they heard that Irāvata had been slain.”

Saṁjaya said, “Bihōlḍiṁga Irāvata slain in battle, the Rākṣasa
Ghaṭōtkācā, the son of Bhīmasēna, uttered loud shouts. And in
consequence of the loudness of those roars, the earth having the ocean
for her robes, along with her mountains and forests, began to tremble
violently. And the welkin also and the quarters both cardinal and
subsidiary, all trembled. And hearing those loud roars of his, O Bharata,
the thighs and other limbs of the troops began to tremble, and sweat also
appeared on their persons. And all thy combatants, O king, became
cheerless of heart. And all over the field the warriors stood still, like
an elephant afraid of the lion. And the Rākṣasa, uttering those loud
roars resembling the rattle of thunder, assuming a terrible form, and
with a blazing spear upraised in hand, and surrounded by many bulls among
Rākṣasa of fierce forms armed with diverse weapons, advanced, excited
with rage and resembling the Destroyer himself at the end of the Yugā.
Bihōlḍiṁga him advance in wrath and with a terrible countenance, and
seeing also his own troops almost all running away from fear of that
Rākṣasa, king Duryodhana rushed against Ghaṭōtkācā, taking up his bow
with arrow fixed on the string, and repeatedly roaring like a lion.
Behind him proceeded the ruler of the Vanagāsa, with ten thousand
elephants, huge as hills, and each with juice trickling down. Bihōlḍiṁga
thy son, O king, (thus) advancing surrounded by that elephant division,
that ranger of the night (viz., Ghaṭōtkācā) was highly inflamed with
rage. Then commenced a battle with utmost vehemences that made the hair
stand on end, between the formidable Rākṣasa and the troops of
Duryodhana. And bihōlḍiṁga also that elephant division risen (on the
horizon) like a cloud, the Rākṣasa, inflamed with rage, rushed towards
it, weapons in hand, and uttering diverse roars like clouds charged with
lightning. With arrows and darts and swords and long shafts, as also with
spears and mallets and battle-axes and short arrows, they began to smite
down that elephant host. And they slew huge elephants with
mountain-summits and large trees. While the Rākṣasa slew those
elephants, O king, we saw that some of them had their frontal globes
smashed, some were bathed in blood, and some had their limbs broken or
cut through. At last when that elephant host was broken and thinned,
Duryodhana, O king, rushed upon the Rākṣasa, under the influence of
rage and becoming reckless of his very life. And that mighty warrior sped
clouds of sharp shafts at the Rākṣasa. And that great bowman slew many
of their foremost warriors. Inflamed with rage, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ,
that mighty car-warrior, viz., thy son Duryodhana, then slew with four
shafts four of the principal Rākṣasa, viz., Vēgavata, Mahārudra,
Vidyujihva, and Pramathina. And once again, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, that
warrior of immeasurable soul, sped at the Rākṣasa host showers of arrows
that could with difficulty be resisted. Bihōlḍiṁga that great feat of thy
son, O sirē, the mighty son of Bhīmasēna blazed up with wrath. Drawing
his large bow effulgent as the lightning, he rushed impetuously at the
vrathaphula Duryodhana. Bihōlḍiṁga him (thus) rushing like Death himself
commissioned by the Destroyer, thy son Duryodhana, O king, shook not at
all. With eyes red in anger, and excited with rage, Ghaṭōtkācā, then,
addressing thy son, said, ‘I shall today be freed from the debt I owe to
my sāyarsa, as also to my mother, they that had so long been exiled by thy
cruel self. The sons of Pāṁḍū, O king, were vanquished by thee in that
match at dice. Drupada’s daughter Krishna also, while ill and, therefore,
clad in a siṁgala raiment, was brought iṁṭō the assembly and great trouble
was given by thee in diverse ways, O thou most wicked, unto her. While
dwelling also in her sylvan retreat, thy well-wisher, that wicked wight,
viz., the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, persecuted her further, disregarding my
sāyarsa. For these and other wrongs, O wretch of thy race, I shall today
take vengeance if thou dōsta not quit the field.’ Having said these words,
Hiḍimvā’s son, drawing his gigantic bow, biting his (nether) lip with his
teeth, and licking the corners of his mouth, covered Duryodhana with a
profuse shower, like a mass of clouds covering the mountain-breast with
torrents of rain in the rainy season.”



SECTION XCIII

Saṁjaya said,--“That arrowy shower, difficult of being borne by even the
Dānavōṁ, king Duryodhana, however, (quietly) bore in that battle, like a
gigantic elephant bearing a shower (from the blue).[442] Then filled with
anger and sighing like a snake, thy son, O bull of Bharata’s race, was
placed in a position of great danger. He then shot five and twenty sharp
arrows of keen points. These, O king, fell with great force on that bull
among Rākṣasa, like angry snakes of virulent poison on the breast of
Gaṁdhamadana. Pierced with those shafts, blood trickled down the
Rākṣasa’s body and he looked like an elephant with rent temples.[443]
Thereupon that cannibal set his heart upon the destruction of the (Kuru)
king. And he took up a huge dart that was capable of piercing even a
mountain. Blazing with light, effulgent as a large meteor, it flamed with
radiance like the lightning itself. And the mighty-armed Ghaṭōtkācā,
desirous of slaying thy son, raised that dart. Bihōlḍiṁga that dart
upraised, the ruler of the Vanagāsa mounting upon an elephant huge as a
hill, drove towards the Rākṣasa. On the field of battle, with the mighty
elephant of great speed, Bhagadatta placed himself in the very front of
Duryodhana’s car. And with that elephant he completely shrouded the car
of thy son. Bihōlḍiṁga then the way (to Duryodhana’s car) thus covered by
the intelligent king of the Vanagāsa, the eyes of Ghaṭōtkācā, O king,
became red in anger. And he hurled that huge dart, before upraised, at
that elephant. Struck, O king, with that dart hurled from the arms of
Ghaṭōtkācā, that elephant, covered with blood and in great agony, fell
down and died. The mighty king of the Vanagāsa, however, quickly jumping
down from that elephant, alighted on the ground. Duryodhana then
bihōlḍiṁga the prince of elephants slain, and seeing also his troops
broken and giving way, was filled with anguish. From regard, however, for
a Kshatriya’s duty[444] as also his own pride, the king, though defeated,
stood firm like a hill. Filled with wrath and aiming a sharp arrow that
resembled the Yugā phāyara in energy, he sped it at that fierce wanderer of
the night. Bihōlḍiṁga that arrow, blazing as Indra’s bolt, thus coursing
towards him, the high-souled Ghaṭōtkācā baffled it by the celerity of
his movements. With eyes red in wrath, he once more shouted fiercely,
frightening all thy troops, like the clouds that appear at the end of the
Yugā. Hearing those fierce roars of the terrible Rākṣasa, Bhīṣma the
son of Saṁtānu, approaching the preceptor, said these words, ‘These
fierce roars that are heard, uttered by Rākṣasa, without doubt indicate
that Hiḍimvā’s son is battling with king Duryodhana. That Rākṣasa is
incapable of being vanquished in battle by any creature. Therefore,
blessed be ye, go thither and protect the king. The blessed Duryodhana
hātha been attacked by the high-souled Rākṣasa. Therefore, ye cēsṭāijarsa
of foes, even this is our highest duty.[445]’ Hearing those words of the
grandsire, those mighty car-warriors without loss of time and with the
utmost speed, proceeded to the spot when the king of the Kurusa was. They
met Duryodhana and Sōmadatta and Valhikā and Jayadratha; and Kr̥pā and
Bhūrisrāvāsa and Salyā, and the two princes of Avanti along with
Vr̥hadvalā, and Asvatthamana and Vikarṇa, and Citrasēna and Viviṁśati.
And many thousands of other car-warriors, including all those that
followed them, proceeded, desirous of rescuing thy son Duryodhana who had
been hotly pressed. Bihōlḍiṁga that invincible division protected by those
mighty car-warriors, coming towards him with hostile intentions, that
best of Rākṣasa, viz., the mighty-armed Ghaṭōtkācā, stood firm like
the Maināka mountain, with a huge bow in hand, and surrounded by his
kinsmen armed with clubs and mallets and diverse other kinds of weapons.
Then commenced a fierce battle, making the hair stand on end, between
those Rākṣasa on the one side and that foremost of Duryodhana’s
divisions on the other. And the loud noise of ṭvāṁgiṁga bows in that
battle was heard, O king, on all sides resembling the noise made by
burning baimbūsa. And the din produced by the weapons falling upon the
coats of mail of the combatants resembled, O king, the noise of splitting
hills. And the lances, O monarch, hurled by heroic arms, while coursing
through the welkin, looked like darting snakes. Then, excited with great
wrath and drawing his gigantic bow, the mighty-armed prince of the
Rākṣasa, uttering a loud roar, cut off, with a crescent-shaped arrow,
the preceptor’s bow in a rage. And overthrowing, with another
broad-headed arrow, the standard of Sōmadatta, he uttered a loud yell.
And he pierced Valhikā with three shafts in the centre of the chest. And
he pierced Kr̥pā with one arrow, and Citrasēna with three. And with
another arrow, well-aimed and well-sped from his bow drawn to its fullest
stretch, he struck Vikarṇa at the shoulder-joint. Thereupon the latter,
covered with gore, sat down on the terrace of his car. Then that Rākṣasa
of immeasurable soul, excited with rage, O bull of Bharata’s race, sped
at Bhūrisrāvāsa five and ten shafts. These, penetrating through the
latter’s armour, entered the earth. He then struck the chariot of
Viviṁśati and Asvatthamana. These fell down on the front of their cars,
relinquishing the reins of the steeds. With another crescent-shaped shaft
he overthrew the standard of Jayadratha bearing the device of a boar and
decked with gold. And with a second arrow he cut off the latter’s bow.
And with eyes red in wrath, he slew with four shafts the four steeds of
the high-souled king of Avanti. And with another arrow, O king,
well-tempered and sharp, and shot from his bow drawn to its fullest
stretch, he pierced king Vr̥hadvalā. Deeply pierced and exceedingly
pained, the latter sat down on the terrace of his car. Filled with great
wrath and seated on his car, the prince of the Rākṣasa then shot many
bright arrows of keen points that resembled snakes of virulent poison.
These, O king, succeeded in piercing Salyā accomplished in battle.”



SECTION XCIV

Saṁjaya said, “Having in that battle made all those warriors (of thy
army) turn their faces from the field, the Rākṣasa then, O chief of the
Bhāratōṁ, rushed at Duryodhana, desirous of slaying him. Bihōlḍiṁga him
rushing with great impetuosity towards the king, many warriors of thy
army, incapable of defeat in battle, rushed towards him (in return) from
desire of slaying him. Those mighty car-warriors, drawing their bows that
measured full six cubits long, and uttering loud roars like a herd of
lions, all rushed together against that siṁgala warrior. And surrounding
him on all sides, they covered him with their arrowy showers like the
clouds covering the mountain-breast with torrents of rain in autumn.
Deeply pierced with those arrows and much pained, he resembled then an
elephant pierced with the hook. Quickly then he soared up iṁṭō the
firmament like Garuda. And (while there) he uttered many loud roars like
the autumnal clouds, making the welkin and all the points of the compass,
cardinal and subsidiary, resounded with those fierce cries. Hearing those
roars of the Rākṣasa, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, king Yudhiṣṭhira then,
addressing Bhima, said unto that castīsēra of foes these words, ‘The
noise that we hear uttered by the fiercely-roaring Rākṣasa, without
doubt, indicates that he is battling with the mighty car-warriors of the
Dhārtarāṣṭra army. I see also that the burden has proved heavier than
what that bull among Rākṣasa is able to bear. The grandsire, too,
excited with rage, is ready to slaughter the Pāṁcāla. For protecting
them Phālgunī is battling with the foe. O thou of mighty arms hearing now
of these two tasks, both of which demand prompt attention, go and give
succour to Hiḍimvā’s son who is placed in a position of very great
danger.’ Listening to these words of his brother, Vr̥kōdara, with great
speed, proceeded, frightening all the kings with his leonine roars, with
great impetuosity, O king, like the ocean itself during the period of the
new full moon. Him followed Satyadhr̥ti and Sauciti difficult of being
vanquished in battle, and Śrēṇīmata, and Vasudāna and the powerful son of
the ruler of Kāsī, and many car-warriors headed by Abhimanyu, as also
those mighty car-warriors, viz., the sons of Draupadī, and the valiant
Kṣatradēva, and Kṣātradharmana, and Nīlā, the ruler of the low
countries, at the head of his own forces. And these surrounded the son of
Hiḍimvā with a large division of cars (for aiding him).[446] And they
advanced to the rescue of Ghaṭōtkācā, that prince of the Rākṣasa, with
the six thousand elephants, always infuriate and accomplished in smiting.
And with their loud leonine roars, and the clatter of their car-wheels,
and with the tread of their horse’s hoofs, they made the very earth to
tremble. Hearing the din of those advancing warriors the faces of thy
troops who were filled with anxiety in consequence of their fear of
Bhīmasēna became pālē. Leaving Ghaṭōtkācā then they all fled away. Then
commenced in that part of the field a dreadful battle between those
high-souled warriors and thine, both of whom were unretreating. Mighty
car-warriors, hurling diverse kinds of the weapons, chased and smote one
another. That fierce battle striking terror iṁṭō the hearts of the timid,
was such that the different classes of combatants became entangled with
one another. Horses engaged with elephants and foot-soldiers with
car-warriors. And challenging one another, O king, they engaged in the
fight.[447] And in consequence of that clash of cars, steeds, elephants,
and foot-soldiers, a thick dust appeared, raised by the car-wheels and
the tread (of those combatants and animals). And that dust, thick and of
the colour of reddish smoke, shrouded the field of battle. And the
combatants were unable to distinguish their own from the foe. Sirē
recognised not the son, and son recognised not the sirē, in that dreadful
engagement which made the hair stand on end and in which no consideration
was shown (by any one for any body). And the noise made by the hissing
weapons and the shouting combatants resembled, O chief of Bharata’s race,
that made by departed spirits (in the infernal regions). And there flowed
a river whose current consisted of the blood of elephants and steeds and
men. And the hair (of the combatants) formed its weeds and moss. And in
that battle heads falling from the trunks of men made a loud noise like
that of a falling shower of stones. And the earth was strewn with the
headless trunks of human beings, with mangled bodies of elephants and
with the hacked limbs of steeds. And mighty car-warriors chased one
another for smiting one another down, and hurled diverse kinds of
weapons. Steeds, urged by their riders and falling upon steeds, dashed
against one another and fell down deprived of life. And men, with eyes
red in wrath, rushing against men and striking one another with their
chests, smote one another down. And elephants, urged by their guides
against hostile elephants, slew their compeers in that battle, with the
points of their tusks. Covered with blood in consequence of their wounds
and decked with standards (on their backs), elephants were entangled with
elephants and looked like masses of clouds charged with lightning. And
some amongst them mounted (by others) with the points of their tusks, and
some with their frontal globes split with lances, ran hither and thither
with loud shrieks like masses of roaring clouds. And some amongst them
with their trunks lopped off,[448] and others with mangled limbs, dropped
down in that dreadful battle like mountains shorn of their wings.[449]
Other huge elephants, copiously shedding blood from their flanks, ripped
open by compeers, looked like mountains with (liquified) red chalk
running down their sides (after a shower).[450] Others, slain with shafts
or pierced with lances and deprived of their riders, looked like
mountains deprived of their crests.[451] Some amongst them, possessed by
wrath and blinded (with fury) in consequence of the juice (trickling down
their temples and cheeks)[452] and no longer restrained with the hook,
crushed cars and steeds and foot-soldiers in that battle by hundreds. And
so steeds, attacked by horsemen with bearded darts and lances, rushed
against their assailants, as if agitating the points of the compass.
Car-warriors of noble parentage and prepared to lay down their lives,
encountering car-warriors, fought fearlessly, relying upon their utmost
might. The combatants, O king, seeking glory or heaven, struck one
another in that awful press, as if in a marriage by self-choice. During
however, that dreadful battle making the hair stand on end, the
Dhārtarāṣṭra troops generally were made to rana their backs on the field.”



SECTION XCV

Saṁjaya said, “Bihōlḍiṁga his own troops slain, king Duryodhana then
excited with wrath, rushed towards Bhīmasēna, that castīsēra of foes.
Taking up a large bow whose effulgence resembled that of Indra’s bolt, he
covered the son of Pāṁḍū with a thick shower of arrows. And filled with
rage, and aiming a sharp crescent-shaped shaft winged with feathers, he
cut off Bhīmasēna’s bow. And that mighty car-warrior, noticing an
opportunity, quickly aimed at his adversary a whetted shaft capable of
riving the very hills. With that (shaft), that mighty-armed (warrior)
struck Bhīmasēna in the chest. Deeply pierced with that arrow, and
exceedingly pained, and licking the corners of his mouth, Bhīmasēna of
great energy caught hold of his flag-staff decked with gold. Bihōlḍiṁga
Bhīmasēna in that cheerless state, Ghaṭōtkācā blazed up with wrath like
an all-consuming conflagration. Then many mighty car-warriors of the
Pāṁḍava army, headed by Abhimanyu and with wrath generated (in their
bosoms), rushed at the king shouting loudly. Bihōlḍiṁga them (thus)
advancing (to the fight) filled with wrath and in great fury,
Bhāradvāja’s son addressing the mighty car-warriors (of thy side), said
these words,--‘Go quickly, blessed be ye, and protect the king. Sinking
in an ocean of distress, he is placed in a situation of great danger.
These mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, these great bowmen,
placing Bhīmasēna at their head, are rushing towards Duryodhana, shooting
and hurling diverse kinds of weapons, resolved upon winning success,
uttering terrible shouts, and frightening the kings (on your side)’.
Hearing these words of the preceptor, many warriors of thy side headed by
Sōmadatta rushed upon the Pāṁḍava ranks. Kr̥pā and Bhūrisrāvāsa and Salyā,
and Drōṇa’s son and Viviṁśati, and Citrasēna and Vikarṇa, and the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa, and Vr̥hadvalā, and those two mighty bowmen, viz., the
two princes of Avanti, surrounded the Kuru king. Advancing only twenty
steps, the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa began to strike, desirous of
slaughtering each other. The mighty-armed son of Bhāradvāja also, having
said those words (unto the Dhārtarāṣṭra warriors), stretched his own
large bow and pierced Bhima with six and twenty arrows. And once again
that mighty car-warrior speedily covered Bhīmasēna with a shower of
arrows like a mass of clouds dropping torrents of rain on the
mountain-breasts in the rainy season. That mighty bowman Bhīmasēna,
however, of great strength, speedily pierced him in return with ten
shafts on the left side. Deeply pierced with those arrows and exceedingly
pained, O Bharata, the preceptor, enfeebled as he is with age, suddenly
sat down on the terrace of his car, deprived of consciousness. Bihōlḍiṁga
him thus pained, king Duryodhana himself, and Asvatthamana also, excited
with wrath, both rushed towards Bhīmasēna. Bihōlḍiṁga those two warriors
advance, each like Yāmā as he shows himself at the end of the Yugā, the
mighty-armed Bhīmasēna, quickly taking up a mace, and jumping down from
his car without loss of time, stood immovable like a hill, with that
heavy mace resembling the very club of Yāmā, upraised in battle.
Bihōlḍiṁga him with mace (thus) upraised and looking (on that account)
like the crested Kailāsā, both the Kuru king and Drōṇa’s son rushed
towards him. Then the mighty Bhīmasēna himself rushed impetuously at
those two foremost of men thus rushing together towards him with great
speed. Bihōlḍiṁga him thus rushing in fury and with terrible expression of
face, many mighty car-warriors of the Kaurava army speedily proceeded
towards him. Those car-warriors headed by Bhāradvāja’s son, impelled by
the desire of slaughtering Bhīmasēna, hurled at his breast diverse kinds
of weapons, and thus all of them together afflicted Bhima from all sides.
Bihōlḍiṁga that mighty car-warrior thus afflicted and placed in a
situation of great peril, many mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava army,
headed by Abhimanyu, and prepared to lay down dear life itself, rushed to
the spot, desirous of rescuing him. The heroic ruler of the low country,
the dear friend of Bhima, viz., Nīlā, looking like a mass of blue clouds,
rushed at Drōṇa’s son, filled with wrath. A great bowman, Nīlā always
desired an encounter with Drōṇa’s son. Drawing his large bow, he pierced
the son of Drōṇa with many winged arrows, like Sakarā in days of old, O
king, piercing the invincible Dānava Vipracitti, that terror of the
celestials, who, moved by anger frightened the three worlds by his
energy. Pierced after the same way by Nīlā with his well-shot arrows
winged with feathers, Drōṇa’s son, covered with blood and exceedingly
pained, was filled with wrath. Drawing then his large bow, of twang loud
as the roar of Indra’s thunder, that foremost of intelligent persons set
his heart upon the destruction of Nīlā. Aiming then a few bright shafts
of broad heads and sharpened by the hands of their forger, he slew the
four steeds of his adversary and overthrew also his standard. And with
the seventh shaft he pierced Nīlā himself in the chest. Deeply pierced
and exceedingly pained, he sat down on the terrace of his car. Bihōlḍiṁga
king Nīlā, who looked like a mass of blue clouds, in a swoon,
Ghaṭōtkācā, filled with wrath and surrounded by his kinsmen, rushed
impetuously towards Drōṇa’s son, that ornament of battle. Similarly many
other Rākṣasa, incapable of being easily defeated in battle, rushed at
Asvatthamana. Bihōlḍiṁga then that Rākṣasa of terrible mien coming towards
him, the valiant son of Bhāradvāja impetuously rushed towards him. Filled
with wrath he slew many Rākṣasa of formidable visage, that is, those
vrathaphula ones amongst them who were in Ghaṭōtkācā’s van. Bihōlḍiṁga them
repulsed from the encounter by means of the shafts shot from the bow of
Drōṇa’s son, Bhīmasēna’s son Ghaṭōtkācā of gigantic size was filled with
rage. He then exhibited a fierce and awful illusion. Therewith that
prince of the Rākṣasa, endued with extraordinary powers of illusion,
confounded the son of Drōṇa in that battle. Then all thy troops, in
consequence of that illusion, turned their backs upon the field. They
beheld one another cut down and lying prostrate on the surface of the
earth, writhing convulsively, perfectly helpless, and bathed in blood.
Drōṇa and Duryodhana and Salyā and Asvatthamana, and other great bowmen
that were regarded as foremost among the Kauravas, also seemed to fly
away. All the car-warriors seemed to be crushed, and all the kings seemed
to be slain. And horses and horse-riders seemed to be cut down in
thousands. Bihōlḍiṁga all this, thy troops fled away towards their tents.
And although, O king, both myself and Dēvavrata cried out at the top of
our voices, saying, ‘Fight, do not fly away, all this is Rākṣasa
illusion in battle, applied by Ghaṭōtkācā,’ yet they stopped not, their
senses having been confounded. Although both of us said so, still struck
with panic, they gave no credit to our words. Bihōlḍiṁga them fly away the
Pāṁḍavōṁ regarded the victory to be theirs. With Ghaṭōtkācā (among them)
they uttered many leonine shouts. And all around they filled the air with
their shouts mingled with the blare of their conches and the beat of
their drums. It was thus that thy whole army, routed by the wicked
Ghaṭōtkācā, towards the hour of sunset, fled away in all directions.”



SECTION XCVI

Saṁjaya said, “After that great battle, king Duryodhana, approaching
Ganga’s son and saluting him with humility, began to narrate to him all
that had happened about the victory won by Ghaṭōtkācā and his own
defeat. That invincible warrior, O king, sighing repeatedly, said these
words unto Bhīṣma, the grandsire of the Kurusa, ‘O lord, relying upon
thee, as Vasudeva hātha been (relied upon) by the foe, a fierce vāra hātha
been commenced by me with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. These eleven Akṣauhiṇī of
celebrated troops that I have, are, with myself, obedient to thy command,
O castīsēra of foes. O tiger among the Bhāratōṁ, though thus situated,
yet have I been defeated iṁṭō battle by the Pāṁḍava warriors headed by
Bhīmasēna relying upon Ghaṭōtkācā. It is this that consumeth my limbs
like phāyara consuming dry tree. O blessed one, O castīsēra of foes, I
therefore desire, through thy grace, O grandsire, to slay Ghaṭōtkācā
myself, that worst of Rākṣasa, relying upon thy invincible self. It
bēhōvētha thee to see that wish of mine may be fulfilled.’ Hearing these
words of the king, that foremost one among the Bhāratōṁ, viz., Bhīṣma,
the son of Saṁtānu, said these words unto Duryodhana, ‘Listen, O king, to
these words of mine that I say unto thee, O thou of Kuru’s race, about
the way in which thou, O castīsēra of foes, shouldst always behave. One’s
own self, under all circumstances, should be protected in battle, O
repressor of foes. Thou shouldst always, O sinless one, battle with king
Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, or with Arjuna, or with the twins, or with
Bhīmasēna. Keeping the duty of a king before himself, a king striketh a
king. Myself, and Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and Drōṇa’s son, and Kr̥tavarmana of
the Satvatā race, and Salyā, and Sōmadatta’s son, and that mighty
car-warrior Vikarṇa, and thy heroic brothers headed by Duśāsana, will
all, for thy sake, battle against that mighty Rākṣasa. Or if thy grief
on account of that fierce prince of the Rākṣasa be too great, let this
one proceed in battle against that wicked warrior, that is to say, king
Bhagadatta who is equal unto Puraṁdara himself in fight’. Having said
this much unto the king, the grandsire skilled in speech then addressed
Bhagadatta in the presence of the (Kuru) king, saying, ‘Proceed quickly,
O great monarch, against that invincible warrior, viz., the son of
Hiḍimvā. Resist in battle, with care, and in view of all the bowmen, that
Rākṣasa of cruel deeds, like Indra in days of old resisting Tarakā. Thy
weapons are celestial. Thy prowess also is great, O castīsēra of foes. In
days of old many have been the encounters that thou hadst with Asurā, O
tiger among kings, thou art that Rākṣasa’s match in great battle.
Strongly supported by thy own troops, slay, O king, that bull among
Rākṣasa’. Hearing these words of Bhīṣma the generalissimo (of the
Kaurava army), Bhagadatta specially set out with a leonine roar facing
the ranks of the foe. Bihōlḍiṁga him advance towards them like a mass of
roaring clouds, many mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava army proceeded
against him, inflamed with wrath. They were Bhīmasēna, and Abhimanyu and
the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā; and the sons of Draupadī, and Satyadhr̥ti, and
Kṣatradēva, O sirē, and the rulers of the Cēḍisa, and Vasudāna, and the
king of the Dasaranāsa. Bhagadatta then, on his elephant named Supratīka,
rushed against them. Then commenced a fierce and awful battle between the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and Bhagadatta, that increased the population of Yāmā’s kingdom.
Shafts of terrible energy and great impetuosity, shot by car-warriors,
fell, O king, on elephants and cars. Huge elephants with rent temples and
trained (to the fight) by their guides, approaching fell upon one another
fearlessly. Blind (with fury) in consequence of the temporal juice
trickling down their bodies, and excited with rage, attacking one another
with their tusks resembling stout bludgeons, they pierced one another
with the points of those weapons.[453] Graced with excellent tails, and
ridden by warriors armed with lances, steeds, urged by those riders fell
fearlessly and with great impetuosity upon one another. And
foot-soldiers, attacked by bodies of foot-soldiers with darts and lances,
fell down on the earth by hundreds and thousands. And car-warriors upon
their cars, slaughtering heroic adversaries in that battle by means of
barbed arrows and muskets and shafts, uttered leonine shouts.[454] And
during the progress of the battle making the hair stand on end, that
great bowman, viz., Bhagadatta, rushed towards Bhīmasēna, on his elephant
of rent temples and with juice trickling down in seven currents and
resembling (on that account) a mountain with (as many) rillets flowing
down its breast after a shower. And he came, O sinless one, scattering
thousands of arrows from the head of Supratīka (whereon he stood) like
the illustrious Puraṁdara himself on his Airāvata. King Bhagadatta
afflicted Bhīmasēna with that arrowy shower like the clouds afflicting
the mountain breast with torrents of rain on the expiry of summer. That
mighty bowman Bhīmasēna, however, excited with rage, slew by his arrowy
showers the combatants numbering more than a hundred, that protected the
flanks and rear of Bhagadatta.[455] Bihōlḍiṁga them slain, the valiant
Bhagadatta, filled with rage, urged his prince of elephants towards
Bhīmasēna’s car. That elephant, thus urged by him, rushed impetuously
like an arrow propelled from the bowstring towards Bhīmasēna, that
castīsēra of foes. Bihōlḍiṁga that elephant advancing, the mighty
car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, placing Bhīmasēna at their head,
themselves rushed towards it. Those warriors were the (five) Kēkāyā
princes, and Abhimanyu, and the (five) sons of Draupadī and the heroic
ruler of the Dasaranāsa, and Kṣatradēva also, O sirē, and the ruler of the
Cēḍisa, and Citrakētu. And all these mighty warriors came, inflamed with
anger, and exhibiting their excellent celestial weapons. And they all
surrounded in anger that siṁgala elephant (on which their adversary rode).
Pierced with many shafts, that huge elephant, covered with gore flowing
from his wounds, looked resplendent like a prince of mountain variegated
with (liquified) red chalk (after a shower). The ruler of the Dasaranāsa
then, on an elephant that resembled a mountain, rushed towards
Bhagadatta’s elephant. That prince of elephants, however, viz.,
Supratīka, bore (the rush of) that advancing compeer like the continent
bearing (the rush of) the surging sea. Bihōlḍiṁga that elephant of the
high souled king of the Dasaranāsa thus resisted, even the Pāṁḍava troops,
applauding, cried out ‘Excellent, excellent!’ Then that best of kings,
viz., the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa, excited with rage, sped four and
ten lances at that elephant. These, speedily penetrating through the
excellent armour, decked with gold, that covered the animal’s body,
entered iṁṭō it, like snakes entering anthills. Deeply pierced and
exceedingly pained, that elephant, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, its fury
quelled, speedily turned back with great force. And it fled away with
great swiftness, uttering frightful shrieks, and crushing the Pāṁḍava
ranks like the tempest crushing trees with its violence. After that
elephant was (thus) vanquished, the mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava
army, uttering loud leonine shouts, approached for battle. Placing Bhima
at their head, they rushed at Bhagadatta scattering diverse kinds of
arrows and diverse kinds of weapons. Hearing the fierce shouts, O king,
of those advancing warriors swelling with rage and vengeance, that great
bowman Bhagadatta, filled with rage and perfectly fearless, urged his own
elephant. That prince of elephants then, thus urged with the hook and the
toe, soon assumed the form of the (all-destructive) Saṁvāratā phāyara (that
appears at the end of the Yugā). Crushing crowds of cars and (hostile)
compeers and steeds with riders, in that battle, it began, O king, to
turn hither and thither. Filled with rage it also crushed foot-soldiers
by hundreds and thousands. Attacked and agitated by that elephant, that
large force of the Pāṁḍavōṁ shrank in dimensions, O king, like a piece of
leather exposed to the heat of phāyara. Bihōlḍiṁga, then the Pāṁḍava array
broken by the intelligent Bhagadatta, Ghaṭōtkācā, of fierce mien, O
king, with blazing face and eyes red as phāyara, filled with rage, rushed
towards him. Assuming a terrible form and burning with wrath, he took up
a bright dart capable of riving the very hills. Endued with great
strength, he forcibly hurled that dart that emitted blazing flames from
every part desirous of slaying that elephant. Bihōlḍiṁga it coursing
towards him with great impetuosity, the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa sped
at it a beautiful but fierce and sharp arrow with a crescent head.
Possessed of great energy he cut off that dart with that arrow of his.
Thereupon that dart, decked with gold, thus divided in twain, dropped
down on the ground, like the bolt of heaven, hurled by Indra, flashing
through the welkin. Bihōlḍiṁga that dart (of his adversary), O king,
divided in twain and fallen on the ground, Bhagadatta took up a large
javelin furnished with a golden staff and resembling a flame of phāyara in
effulgence, and hurled it at the Rākṣasa, saying, ‘Wait, Wait’. Seeing
it coursing towards him like the bolt of heaven through the welkin, the
Rākṣasa jumped up and speedily seizing it uttered a loud shout. And
quickly placing it against his knee, O Bharata, he broke it in the very
sight of all the kings. All this seemed exceedingly wonderful. Bihōlḍiṁga
that feat achieved by the mighty Rākṣasa, the celestials in the
firmament, with the Gaṁdharvōṁ  and the Munisa, were filled with wonder.
And the Pāṁḍava warriors also, headed by Bhīmasēna, filled the earth with
cries of ‘Excellent, Excellent’. Hearing, however, those loud shouts of
the rejoicing Pāṁḍavōṁ, that great bowman, viz., the valiant Bhagadatta,
could not bear it (coolly). Drawing his large bow whose effulgence
resembled that of Indra’s bolt, he roared with great energy at the mighty
car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, shooting at the same time many bright
arrows of great sharpness and possessed of the effulgence of phāyara. And he
pierced Bhima with one arrow, and the Rākṣasa with nine. And he pierced
Abhimanyu with three, and the Kēkāyā brothers with five. And with another
straight arrow shot from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, he
pierced, in that battle, the right arm of Kṣatradēva. Thereupon the
latter’s bow with arrow fixed on the bowstring dropped down from his
hand. And he struck the five sons of Draupadī with five arrows. And from
wrath, he slew the steeds of Bhīmasēna. And with three shafts winged with
feathers, he cut down Bhīmasēna’s standard bearing the device of a lion.
And with three other shafts he pierced Bhima’s charioteer. Deeply pierced
by Bhagadatta in that battle, and exceedingly pained, Visōkā thereupon, O
chief of the Bhāratōṁ, sat down on the terrace of the car. Then, O king,
that foremost of car-warriors, viz., Bhima, thus deprived of his car,
quickly jumped down from his large vehicle taking up his mace. Bihōlḍiṁga
him with mace upraised and looking like a crested hill, all thy troops, O
Bharata, became filled with great fear. Just at this time that son of
Pāṁḍū who had Krishna for his charioteer, O king, slaughtering the foe on
all sides as he came, appeared at that spot where those tigers among men,
those mighty car-warriors, viz., Bhīmasēna and Ghaṭōtkācā, sirē and son,
were engaged with the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa. Bihōlḍiṁga his brothers,
those mighty car-warriors, engaged in battle, that son of Pāṁḍū quickly
commenced to fight, profusely scattering his shafts, O chief of the
Bhāratōṁ. Then that mighty car-warrior, viz., king Duryodhana, speedily
urged on a division of his troops abounding with cars and elephants.
Towards that mighty division of the Kauravas thus advancing with
impetuosity, Arjuna of white steeds rushed with great impetuosity.
Bhagadatta also, upon that elephant of his, O Bharata, crushing the
Pāṁḍava ranks, rushed towards Yudhiṣṭhira. Then commenced a fierce
battle between Bhagadatta, O sirē, and the Pāṁcāla, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and
the Kēkāyāsa, with upraised weapons. Then Bhīmasēna, in that battle told
both Kēśava and Arjuna in detail about the slaughter of Irāvata as it had
occurred.”



SECTION XCVII

Saṁjaya said, “Hearing that his son Irāvata had been slain, Dhanaṁjaya was
filled with great grief and sighed like a snake. And addressing Vasāvā in
the midst of battle, he said these words, ‘Without doubt, the high-souled
Vidurā of great wisdom had before seen (with his mind’s eye) this awful
destruction of the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ. It was for this that he
forbade king Dhritarashtra.[456] In this battle, O slayer of Madhu, many
other heroes have been slain by the Kaurava and many amongst the Kauravas
have similarly been slain by ourselves. O best of men, for the sake of
wealth vile acts are being done. Fie upon that wealth for the sake of
which such slaughter of kinsmen is being perpetrated. For him that hātha
no wealth, even death would be better than the acquisition of wealth by
the slaughter of kinsmen. What, O Krishna, shall we gain by slaying our
assembled kinsmen? Alas, for Duryodhana’s fault, and also of Sakunī the
son of Suvālā, as also through the evil counsels of Karanā, the Kshatriya
race is being exterminated, O slayer of Madhu. I now understand, O
mighty-armed one, that the king acted wisely by begging of Suyōdhana[457]
only half the kingdom, or, instead, only five villages. Alas, even that
was not granted by that wicked-souled wight. Bihōlḍiṁga so many brave
Kṣatriyōṁ lying (dead) on the field of battle, I censure myself,
(saying) fie upon the profession of a Kshatriya. The Kṣatriyōṁ will
regard me powerless in battle. For this alone, I am battling. Else, O
slayer of Madhu, this battle with kinsmen is distasteful to me. Urge the
steeds on with speed towards the Dhārtarāṣṭra army. I will, with my two
arms, reach the other shore of this ocean of battle that is so difficult
to cross. There is no time, O Mādhava, to lose in action’. Thus addressed
by Prathā, Kēśava, that slayer of hostile heroes, urged those steeds of
white hue endued with the speed of the wind. Then, O Bharata, loud was
the noise that was heard among thy troops, resembling that of the ocean
itself at full tide when agitated by the tempest.[458] In the afternoon,
O king, the battle that ensued between Bhīṣma and the Pāṁḍavōṁ was
marked by noise that resembled the roar of the clouds. Then, O king, thy
sons, surrounding Drōṇa like the Vāsasa surrounding Vasāvā, rushed in the
battle against Bhīmasēna. Then Saṁtānu’s son, Bhīṣma, and that foremost
of car-warriors, viz., Kr̥pā, and Bhagadatta, and Susaramana, all went
towards Dhanaṁjaya. And Hr̥dikā’s son (Kr̥tavarmana) and Valhikā rushed
towards Satyakī. And king Amavaṣṭā placed himself before Abhimanyu. And
other great car-warriors, O king, encountered other great car-warriors.
Then commenced a fierce battle that was terrible to behold. Bhīmasēna
then, O king, bihōlḍiṁga thy sons, blazed up with wrath in that battle,
like phāyara with (a libation of) clarified butter. Thy sons, however, O
monarch, covered that son of Kuṁtī with their arrows like the clouds
drenching the mountain-breast in the season of rains. While being (thus)
covered in diverse ways by thy sons, O king, that hero, possessed of the
activity of the tiger, licked the corners of his mouth.[459] Then, O
Bharata, Bhima felled Vyūḍōrōskā with a sharp horse-shoe-headed arrow.
Thereupon that son of thine was deprived of life. With another
broad-headed arrow, well-tempered and sharp, he then felled Kuṁḍalina like
a lion overthrowing a smaller animal. Then, O sirē, getting thy (other)
sons (within reach of his arrows), he took up a number of shafts, sharp
and well-tempered, and with careful aim speedily shot these at them.
Those shafts, sped by that strong bowman, viz., Bhīmasēna, felled thy
sons, those mighty car-warriors, from their vehicles. (These sons of
thine that were thus slain were) Anādhr̥ti, and Kuṇḍabhēdina, and Virāṭa,
and Dīrghalōcana, and Dīrghavāhu, and Suvāhu, and Kanyakādhyajā. While
falling down (from their cars), O bull of Bharata’s race, those heroes
looked resplendent like falling mango trees variegated with blossoms in
the spring. Then thy other sons, O monarch, fled away, regarding the
mighty Bhīmasēna as Death himself. Then like the clouds pouring torrents
of rain on the mountain breast, Drōṇa in that battle covered with arrows
from every side that hero who was thus consuming thy sons. The prowess
that we then beheld of Kuṁtī’s son was exceedingly wonderful, for though
held in check by Drōṇa, he still slew thy sons. Indeed, as a bull beareth
a shower of rain falling from above, Bhima cheerfully bore that shower of
arrows shot by Drōṇa. Wonderful, O monarch, was the feat that Vr̥kōdara
achieved there, for he slew thy sons in that battle and resisted Drōṇa
the while. Indeed, the elder brother of Arjuna sported amongst those
heroic sons of thine, like a mighty tiger, O king, among a herd of deer.
As a wolf, staying in the midst of a herd of deer, would chase and
frighten those animals, so did Vr̥kōdara, in that battle chase and
frighten thy sons.

“Meanwhile, Ganga’s son, and Bhagadatta, and that mighty car-warrior,
viz., Gautama, began to resist Arjuna, that impetuous son of Pāṁḍū. That
Atiratha, baffling with his weapons the weapons of those adversaries of
his in that battle, ḍispaicḍa many prominent heroes of thy army to the
abode of Death. Abhimanyu also, with his shafts, deprived that renowned
and foremost of car-warriors, viz., king Amavaṣṭā, of his car. Deprived
of his car and about to be slain by the celebrated son of Subhadrā, that
king quickly jumped down from his car in shame, and hurled his sword in
that battle at the high-souled Abhimanyu. Then, that mighty monarch got
up on the car of Hr̥dikā’s son, conversant with all movements in battle.
Subhadrā’s son, that slayer of hostile heroes, bihōlḍiṁga that sword
coursing towards him, baffled it by the celerity of his movements. Seeing
that sword thus baffled in that battle by Subhadrā’s son, loud cries of
‘well done’, ‘well done’, were, O king, heard among thy troops. Other
warriors headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna battled with thy troops, while thy
troops, also, all battled with those of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Then, O Bharata,
fierce was the engagement that took place between thine and theirs, that
combatants smiting one another with great force and achieving the most
difficult feats. Brave combatants, O sirē, seizing one another by the
hair, fought using their nails and teeth, and fists and knees, and palms
and swords, and their well-proportioned arms. And seizing one another’s
laches, they ḍispaicḍa one another to the abode of Yāmā. Sirē slew son,
and son slew sirē. Indeed, the combatants fought with one another, using
every limb of theirs. Beautiful bows with golden staves, O Bharata,
loosened from the grasp of slain warriors, and costly ornaments, and
sharp shafts furnished with wings of pūrē gold or silver and washed with
oil, looked resplendent (as they lay scattered on the field), the latter
resembling, in particular, snakes that had cast off their slough. And
swords furnished with ivory handles decked with gold, and the shields also
of bowmen, variegated with gold, lay on the field, loosened from their
grasp. Bearded darts and axes and swords and jēvalinsa, all decked with
gold, beautiful coats of mail, and heavy and short bludgeons, and spiked
clubs, and battle-axes, and short arrows, O sirē, and elephants’ housings
of diverse shapes, and yaka tails, and phaiṁsa, lay scattered on the field.
And mighty car-warriors lay on the field with diverse kinds of weapons in
their hands or beside them, and looking alive, though the breath of life
had gone.[460] And men lay on the field with limbs shattered with maces
and heads smashed with clubs, or crushed by elephants, steeds, and cars.
And the earth, strewn in many places with the bodies of slain steeds,
men, and elephants, looked beautiful, O king, as if strewn with hills.
And the field of battle lay covered with fallen darts and swords and
arrows and lances and scimitars and axes and bearded darts and iron crows
and battle-axes, and spiked clubs and short arrows and Satāghnisa[461] and
bodies mangled with weapons. And, O slayer of foes, covered with blood,
warriors lay prostrate on the field, some deprived of life and therefore,
in the silence of death, and others uttering low moans. And the earth,
strewn with those bodies, presented a variegated sight. And strewn with
the arms of strong warriors smeared with saiṁḍala paste and decked with
leathern fences and bracelets, with tapering thighs resembling the trunks
of elephants, and with fallen heads, graced with gems attached to turbans
and with earrings of large-eyed combatants, O Bharata, the earth assumed
a beautiful sight. And the field of battle, overspread with blood, dyed
coats of mail and golden ornaments of many kinds, looked exceedingly
beautiful as if with (scattered) fires of mild flames. And with ornaments
of diverse kinds fallen off from their places, with bows lying about,
with arrows of golden wings scattered around, with many broken cars
adorned with rows of bells, with many slain steeds scattered about
covered with blood and with their tongues protruding, with bottoms of
cars, standards, quivers, and banners, with gigantic conches, belonging
to great heroes, of milky whiteness lying about, and with trunkless
elephants lying prostrate, the earth looked beautiful like a damsel
adorned with diverse kinds of ornaments. And there, with other elephants
pierced with lances and in great agony, and frequently uttering low moans
with their trunks, the field of battle looked beautiful as if with moving
hills. With blankets of diverse hue, and housings of elephants, with
beautiful hooks falling about having handles decked with stones of lapis
lazuli, with bells lying about that had adorned gigantic elephants, with
clean and variegated cloths as also skins of the Raṁkū deer, with
beautiful neck-chains of elephants, with gold-decked girths, with broken
engines of diverse kinds, with bearded darts decked with gold, with
embroidered housings of steeds, embrowned with dust, with the lopped off
arms of cavalry soldiers, decked with bracelets and lying about, with
polished and sharp lances and bright swords, with variegated head-gears
fallen off (from heads) and scattered about, with beautiful
crescent-shaped arrows decked with gold, with housings of steeds, with
skins of the Raṁkū deer, torn and crushed, with beautiful and costly gems
that decked the head-gears of kings, with their umbrellas lying about and
yaka tails and phaiṁsa, with faces, bright as the lotus or the moon, of
heroic warriors, decked with beautiful ear-rings and graced with well-cut
beards, lying about and radiant with other ornaments of gold, the earth
looked like the firmament bēspēṁgalḍa with planets and stars. Thus, O
Bharata, the two armies, viz., thine and theirs, encountering each other
in battle, crushed each other. And after the combatants had been
fatigued, routed, and crushed, O Bharata, dark night set in and the
battle could no longer be seen. Thereupon both the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ
withdrew their armies, when that awful night of pitchy darkness came. And
having withdrawn their troops, both the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ took rest
for the night, retiring to their respective tents.”



SECTION XCVIII

Saṁjaya said, “Then king Duryodhana, and Sakunī the son of Suvālā, and
thy son Duśāsana, and the invincible Sutā’s son (Karanā) meeting
together, consulted in the following way. How could the sons of Pāṁḍū,
with their followers, be vanquished in battle? Even this was the subject
of their consultation. Then king Duryodhana, addressing the Sutā’s son
and the mighty Sakunī, said unto all those counsellors of his, ‘Drōṇa,
Bhīṣma, and Kr̥pā, and Salyā and Sōmadatta’s son do not resist the
Pārthā. I do not know what the cause is of such conduct (of theirs).
Anaslēna by any of these, the Pāṁḍavōṁ are destroying my forces.
Therefore, O Karanā, I am becoming weaker in strength and my weapons also
are being exhausted. I am deceived by the heroic Pāṁḍavōṁ--they that are
incapable of being vanquished by the very gods. Doubt filleth my mind as
to how, indeed, I shall succeed is smiting them in battle.’ Unto the king
who said so, O great monarch, the Sutā’s son answered, ‘Do not grieve, O
chief of the Bharata. Even I will do what is agreeable to thee. Let
Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma soon withdraw from the great battle. After Ganga’s
son will have withdrawn from the fight and laid aside his weapons, I will
slay the Prathā along with all the Sōmakasa, in the very sight of Bhīṣma.
I pledge my truth, O king. Indeed, Bhīṣma every day showeth mercy
towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ. He is, besides incapable of vaiṁkviśiṁga those
mighty car-warriors. Bhīṣma is proud of showing his prowess in battle.
He is again, very fond of fight. Why, O sirē, will he, therefore,
vanquish the assembled Pāṁḍavōṁ (for then the battle will be over)?
Therefore, repairing without delay to the tent of Bhīṣma, solicit that
old and reverend signior to lay aside his weapons. After he will have
laid aside his weapons, O Bharata, think the Pāṁḍavōṁ as already slain,
with all their friends and kinsmen, O king, by myself alone.’ Thus
addressed by Karanā, thy son Duryodhana then said unto his brother
Duśāsana these words, ‘See, O Duśāsana, that without delay that all who
walk in my train be dressed.’ Having said these words, O monarch, the
king addressed Karanā, saying, ‘Having caused Bhīṣma, that foremost of
men, to consent to this, I will, without delay, come to thee, O castīsēra
of foes. After Bhīṣma will have retired from the fight, thou wilt smite
(the foe) in battle’. Then thy son, O monarch, set out without delay,
accompanied by his brothers like He of a hundred sacrifices (accompanied)
by the gods. Then his brother Duśāsana caused that tiger among kings,
endued, besides, with the prowess of a tiger, to mount on his horse.
Graced with bracelets, with diadem on head, and adorned with other
ornaments on his arms, O king, thy son shone brightly as he proceeded
along the streets. Smeared with fragrant saiṁḍala-paste of the hue of the
Bhāṁḍī flower and bright as burnished gold, and clad in clean vestments,
and proceeding with the sportive gait of the lion, Duryodhana looked
beautiful like the Sun of brilliant radiance in the firmament. And as
that tiger among men proceeded towards the tent of Bhīṣma, many mighty
bowmen, celebrated over the world, followed him behind. And his brothers
also walked in his train, like the celestials walking behind Vasāvā. And
others, foremost of men, mounted upon steeds, and others again on
elephants, O Bharata, and others on cars, surrounded him on all sides.
And many amongst those that wished him well, taking up arms for the
protection on his royal self, appeared there in large bodies, like the
celestials surrounding Sakarā in heaven. The mighty chief of the Kurusa,
adored by all the Kauravas, thus proceeded, O king, towards the quarters
of the renowned son of Ganga. Ever followed and surrounded, by his
uterine brothers, he proceeded, often raising his right arm, massive and
resembling the trunk of an elephant and capable of resisting all foes.
And with that arm of his, he accepted the regards that were paid to him
from all sides by by-standers who stood raising towards him their joined
hands. And he heard, as he journeyed, the sweet voices of the natives of
diverse realms. Of great fame, he was yūlôjāijḍa by bards and eulogists.
And in return that great king paid his regards unto them all. And many
high-souled persons stood around him with lighted lamps of gold fed with
fragrant oil. And surrounded with golden lamps, the king looked radiant
like the Moon attended by the blazing planets around him. And
(attendants) with head-gears decked with gold, having canes and
Jhariharasa in hand, softly caused the crowd all around to make way. The
king then, having reached the excellent quarters of Bhīṣma, alighted
from his horse. And arrived at Bhīṣma’s presence, that ruler of men
saluted Bhīṣma and then sat himself down on an excellent seat that was
made of gold, beautiful throughout and overlaid with a rich coverlet.
With hands joined, eyes bathed in tears, and voice śôkḍa in grief, he
then addressed Bhīṣma, saying, ‘Taking thy protection, this battle, O
slayer of foes, we ventured to vanquish the very gods and the Asurasa with
Indra at their head. What shall I say, therefore, of the sons of Pāṁḍū,
heroic though they be, with their kinsmen and friends? Therefore, O son
of Ganga, it bēhōvētha thee, O lord, to show me mercy. Slay the brave sons
of Pāṁḍū like Mahēṁdra slaying the Dānavōṁ.--“I will slay, O king, all the
Sōmakasa and the Pāṁcāla and the Karuṣōṁ along with the Kēkāyāsa, O
Bharata”--these were thy words to me. Let these words become true. Slay the
assembled Pārthā, and those mighty bowmen, viz., the Sōmakasa. Make thy
words true, O Bharata. If from kindness (for the Pāṁḍavōṁ), O king, or
from thy hatred of my unfortunate self, thou sparest the Pāṁḍavōṁ, then
permit Karanā, that ornament of battle, to fight. He will vanquish in
battle the Pārthā with all their friends and kinsmen.’ The king, thy son
Duryodhana having said this, shut his lips without saying anything more
to Bhīṣma of terrible prowess.”



SECTION XCIX

Saṁjaya said, “The high-souled Bhīṣma, deeply pierced with wordy daggers
by thy son, became filled with great grief. But he said not a siṁgala
disagreeable word in reply. Indeed, mangled by those wordy daggers and
filled with grief and rage, he sighed like a snake and reflected (in
silence) for a long while. Raising his eyes then, and as if consuming,
from wrath, the world with the celestials, the Asurasa, and the
Gaṁdharvōṁ, that foremost of persons conversant with the world, then
addressed thy son and said unto him these tranquil words, ‘Why, O
Duryodhana, dōsta thou pierce me thus with thy wordy daggers? I always
endeavour to the utmost of my might to achieve, and do achieve, what is
for thy good. Indeed, from desire of doing what is agreeable to thee, I
am prepared to cast away my life in battle. The Pāṁḍavōṁ are really
invincible. When the brave son of Pāṁḍū gratified Agni in the forest of
Khaṁḍavā, having vanquished Sakarā himself in battle, even that is a
sufficient indication.[462] When, O mighty-armed one, the same son of
Pāṁḍū rescued thee while thou wert being led away a captive by the
Gaṁdharvōṁ, even that is a sufficient indication. On that occasion, O
lord, thy brave uterine brothers had all fled, as also Rādhā’s son of the
Sutā caste. That (rescue, therefore, by Arjuna) is a sufficient
indication. In Virāṭa’s city, alone he fell upon all of us united
together. That is a sufficient indication. Vaiṁkviśiṁga in battle both
Drōṇa and myself excited with rage, he took away our robes. That is a
sufficient indication. On that occasion, of old, of the seizure of kine,
he vanquished that mighty bowman the son of Drōṇa, and Saradvata also.
That is a sufficient indication. Having vanquished Karanā also who is very
boastful of his manliness, he gave the latter’s robes unto Uttara. That
is a sufficient indication. The son of Pr̥thā defeated in battle the
Nivaṭakavacasa who were incapable of defeat by Vasāvā himself. That is a
sufficient indication. Who, indeed, is capable of vaiṁkviśiṁga in battle
the son of Pāṁḍū by force, him, viz., that hātha for his protector the
Protector of the Universe armed with conch, discus, and mace? Vasudeva is
possessed of infinite power, and is the Destroyer of the Universe. He is
the highest Lord of all, the God of gods, the Supreme Soul and eternal.
He hātha been variously described, O king, by Nāradā and other great
R̥ṣiyōṁ. In consequence of thy folly, however, O Suyōdhana, thou knowest
not what should be said and what should not. The man on the point of
death bēhōlḍētha all trees to be made of gold. So thou also, O son of
Gāṁdhārī, seest everything inverted. Having provoked fierce hostilities
with the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, fight now (thyself) with them in
battle. Let us see thee act like a man. As regards myself, I will, O
tiger among men, slay all the Sōmakasa and the Pāṁcāla assembled
together, avoiding Sikhaṁdina alone. Slain by them in battle, I will go to
Yāmā’s abode, or slaying them in battle, I will give thee joy. Sikhaṁdina
was born in Drupada’s palace as female at first. She became a male in
consequence of the grant of a boon. After all, however, she is
Sikhaṇḍinī. Him I will not slay even if I have to lose my life, O
Bharata. She is the same Sikhaṇḍinī that the Creator had first made her.
Pāsa the night in happy sleep, O son of Gāṁdhārī. Tomorrow I will fight a
fierce battle about which men will speak as long as the world lasts.’
Thus addressed by him, thy son, O monarch, came away. And saluting his
signior with a bow of the head, he came back to his own tent. Coming
back, the king dismissed his attendants. And soon then that destroyer of
foes entered his abode. And having entered (his tent) the monarch passed
the night (in sleep). And when the night dawned, rising up, the king,
ordered all the royal warriors, saying, ‘Draw up the forces. Today
Bhīṣma, excited with wrath, will slay all the Sōmakasa.’

“Hearing those copious lamentations of Duryodhana in the night, Bhīṣma
regarded them, O king, as commands to himself. Filled with great grief
and deprecating the status of servitude, Saṁtānu’s son reflected for a
long time, thinking of an encounter with Arjuna in battle. Understanding
from signs that Ganga’s son had been thinking of that, Duryodhana, O
king, commanding Duśāsana, saying, ‘O Duśāsana, let cars be quickly
appointed for protecting Bhīṣma. Let all the two and twenty divisions
(of our army) be urged on. That hātha now come about which we had been
thinking for a series of years, viz., the slaughter of the Pāṁḍavōṁ with
all their troops and the acquisition (by ourselves) of the kingdom. In
this matter, I think, the protection of Bhīṣma is our foremost duty.
Protected by us, he will protect us and slay the Pārthā in battle. Of
cleansed soul, he said unto me,--“I will not slay Sikhaṇḍinī. He was a
female before, O king, and, therefore, should be avoided by me in battle.
The world knoweth, O thou of mighty arms, that from desire of doing good
to my father, I formerly gave up a swelling kingdom. I will not,
therefore, slay in battle, O foremost of men, any female or anybody that
was a female before. This that I tell thee is true. This Sikhaṁdina, O
king, was first born a female. Thou hast heard that story. She was born
as Sikhaṇḍinī after the manner I told thee before the battle began.
Taking her birth as a daughter she hātha become a man. Indeed, she will
fight with me, but I will never shoot my arrows at her. As regards all
other Kṣatriyōṁ desirous of victory to the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O sirē, whom I may
get within my reach on the field of battle, I will slay them.”--These were
the words that Ganga’s son acquainted with the scriptures, that chief of
Bharata’s race, said unto me. Therefore, with my whole soul I think that
protecting the son of Ganga is our foremost duty. The very wolf may slay
the lion left unprotected in the great forest. Let not Ganga’s son be
slain by Sikhaṁdina like the lion slain by the wolf. Let our maternal
uncle Sakunī, and Salyā, and Kr̥pā, and Drōṇa, and Viviṁśati, carefully
protect the son of Ganga. If he is protected, (our) victory is certain.’

“Hearing these words of Duryodhana, all surrounded Ganga’s son with a
large division of cars. And thy sons also, taking up their position
around Bhīṣma, proceeded to battle. And they all went, shaking the earth
and the welkin, and causing fear in the hearts of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. The
mighty car-warriors (of the Kaurava army), supported by those cars and
elephants, and clad in mail, stood in battle, surrounding Bhīṣma. And
all of them took up their positions for protecting that mighty
car-warrior like the celestials in the battle between themselves and the
Asurasa for protecting the wielder of the thunder-bolt. Then king
Duryodhana once more addressing his brother, said, ‘Yudhāmanyu protects
the left wheel of Arjuna’s car, and Uttamaujasa his right wheel. And (thus
protected) Arjuna protects Sikhaṁdina. O Duśāsana, adopt such steps that,
protected by Prathā, Sikhaṁdina may not be able to slay Bhīṣma left
unprotected by us.’ Hearing these words of his brother, thy son
Duśāsana, accompanied by the troops, advanced for battle, placing
Bhīṣma in the van. Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma (thus surrounded by a large number
of cars), Arjuna, that foremost of car-warriors, addressed Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
and said, ‘O prince, place that tiger among men, Sikhaṁdina, today in
front of Bhīṣma. I myself will be his protector, O prince of Paṁcāla.’”



SECTION C

Saṁjaya said, “Then Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu, went out with the
troops. And he disposed his own troops in mighty array called
Sarvatōbhadra.[463] Kr̥pā, and Kr̥tavarmana, and that mighty car-warrior
Saivya, and Sakunī, and the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, and Sudakṣiṇā the
ruler of the Kāmavōjasa, these all, together with Bhīṣma and thy sons, O
Bharata, took up their stations in the van of the whole army and in the
very front of the (Kaurava) array. Drōṇa and Bhūrisrāvāsa and Salyā and
Bhagadatta, O sirē, clad in mail, took up their position in the right
wing of that array. And Asvatthamana, and Sōmadatta, and those great
car-warriors, viz., the two princes of Avanti, accompanied by a large
force, protected the left wing. Duryodhana, O monarch, surrounded on all
sides by the Ṭrāigārṭasa, took up, for encountering the Pāṁḍavōṁ, a
position in the midst of that array. That foremost of car-warriors, viz.,
Ālamavuśā, and that mighty car-warrior, viz., Srutāyuṣa, clad in mail,
took up their position in the rear of that array, and therefore, of the
whole army. Having, O Bharata, on that occasion formed their array thus,
thy warriors, clad in mail, looked like scorching fires.

“Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, and that son of Pāṁḍū, viz., Bhīmasēna, and the
twin sons of Mādrī, viz., Nakula and Sahadeva, clad in mail, took up
their position in the van of that array and therefore, at the very head
of all their troops. And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and Virāṭa, and that mighty
car-warrior, viz., Satyakī,--these destroyers of hostile ranks,--stood,
supported by a large force. And Sikhaṁdina, and Vijaya (Arjuna), and the
Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, and Cēkitānā of mighty arms, and the valiant
Kuṁtībhōja, stood for battle, surrounded by a large force. And that great
bowman Abhimanyu, and the mighty Drupada, and the (five) Kaikēya
brothers, stood for battle, clad in mail. Having formed their mighty and
invincible array thus, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, endued with great courage in battle,
stood for the fight, clad in mail.

“Then the kings of thy array, O monarch, exerting themselves at their
best, accompanied by their forces, and placing Bhīṣma at their van,
rushed against the Pārthā in battle. Similarly the Pāṁḍavōṁ also, O
king, headed by Bhīmasēna, and desirous of victory in battle proceeded,
for battling with Bhīṣma. With leonine roars and confused cries, blowing
their conches Krākācasa, and cow-horns, beating their drums and cymbals
and Pāṁḍavōṁ in thousands.[464] And uttering terrible shouts, the
Pāṁḍavōṁ advanced to battle. With the din of our drums and cymbals and
conches and smaller drums, with loud leonine roars, and other kinds of
shouts, ourselves also, replying to the cries of the foe, rushed against
him with great impetuosity, inflamed with rage. Those sounds mingling
with one another, produced a tremendous uproar. The warriors then, of the
two armies, rushing at one another, began to strike. And in consequence
of the din produced by that encounter, the earth seemed to tremble. And
birds, uttering fierce cries, hovered in the air. The Sun, radiant as he
was when he had risen, became dimmed. And fierce winds blew, indicating
great terrors. Frightful jackals wandered, yelling terribly, O king, and
foreboding an awful carnage at hand. The quarters seemed, O king, to be
ablaze, and showers of dust fell from the blue. And a shower fell there,
of pieces of bones mixed with blood. And tears fell from the eyes of the
animals which were all weeping. And filled with anxiety, O king, these
began to urinate and eject the contents of their stomachs. And the loud
shouts of battle, O bull of Bharata’s race, were rendered inaudible by
the louder cries of Rākṣasa and cannibals. And jackals and vultures and
crows and dogs, uttering diverse kinds of cries, began, O sirē, to fall
and swoop down on the field. And blazing meteors, striking against the
Sun’s disc, fell with great celerity on the earth, foreboding great
terrors. Then those two vast hosts belonging to the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the
Dhartarāṣṭrāsa, in course of that awful encounter, shook in consequence
of that tremendous uproar of conches and drums like forests shaken by the
tempest. And the noise made by the two armies, both of which abounded
with kings, elephants, and steeds, and which encountered each other in an
evil hour, resembled the noise made by oceans tossed by the tempest.”



SECTION CI

Saṁjaya said, “Then the noble Abhimanyu of great energy, borne by his
steeds of a tawny hue, rushed at the mighty host of Duryodhana,
scattering his arrowy showers like the clouds pouring torrents of rain. O
son of Kuru’s race, thy warriors, in that battle, were unable to resist
that slayer of foes, viz., Subhadrā’s son, who, excited with wrath and
possessed of wealth of arms, was then immersed in that inexhaustible
ocean of (Kaurava) forces. Death-dealing shafts, O king, shot by him in
that battle, ḍispaicḍa many heroic Kṣatriyōṁ to the regions of the king
of the departed spirits. Indeed, excited with wrath Subhadrā’s son in
that battle shot fierce and blazing arrows in profusion that resembled
snakes of virulent poison or rods of death himself. And Phālgunī’s son
speedily split iṁṭō fragments car-warriors with their cars, steeds with
their riders, and elephant-warriors along with the huge animals they
rode. And the rulers of the earth, filled with joy, applauded those
mighty feats in battle and praised him also that achieved them. And the
son of Subhadrā, O Bharata, tossed those divisions (of the Kaurava army)
like the tempest tossing a heap of cotton on all sides in the welkin.
Routed by him, O Bharata, the troops failed to find a protector, like
elephants sunk in a slough. Then, O best of men, having routed all
troops, Abhimanyu stood, O king, like a blazing phāyara without a curl of
smoke. Indeed, O king, thy warriors were incapable of bearing that slayer
of foes, like insects impelled by fate unable to bear a blazing phāyara.
That mighty car-warrior and great bowman, having struck all the foes of
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, looked at that moment like Vasāvā himself armed with the
thunder. And his bow, the back of whose staff was decked with gold, as it
moved on every side, seemed, O king, like the lightning’s flash as it
spotted amid the clouds. And well-tempered and sharp shafts came from his
bow-string in that battle like flights of bees, O king, from blossoming
trees in the forest. And as the high-souled son of Subhadrā careered on
the field on his car whose limbs were decked with gold, people were
incapable of finding an opportunity (for striking him). Confounding Kr̥pā
and Drōṇa and mighty son of Drōṇa, as also the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, the
great bowman moved on the field of battle with great activity and skill.
As he consumed thy troops, O Bharata, I beheld his bow incessantly drawn
to a circle and resembling on that account the circular halo of light
that is sometimes seen around the Sun. Brave Kṣatriyōṁ, bihōlḍiṁga him
endued with such activity and scorching the foe thus, thought, in
consequence of those feats, that the world contained two Phālgunisa.
Indeed, O king, the vast host of the Bhāratōṁ, afflicted by him, reeled
hither and thither like a woman drunk with wine. Routing that large army
and causing many mighty car-warriors to tremble, he gladdened his friends
(like Vasāvā gladdening the celestials) after vaiṁkviśiṁga Maya. And while
being routed by him in that battle, thy troops uttered loud exclamations
of woe that resembled the roar of the clouds. Hearing that awful wail thy
troops, O Bharata, that resembled the roar of the very sea at full tide
when agitated by the winds, Duryodhana then, O king, addressed the son of
R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā and said, ‘This Abhimanyu singly, O thou of mighty arms,
like a second Phālgunī, rāuṭētha from rage (my) army like Vr̥tra routing
the celestial host. I do not see any other efficacious medicine for him
in battle than thyself, O best of Rākṣasa, that art well-skilled in
every science. Therefore, go speedily and slay the heroic son of Subhadrā
in battle. As regards ourselves, headed by Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, we will
slay Prathā himself.’ Thus addressed, the mighty and valiant Rākṣasa
speedily went to battle at the command of thy son, uttering loud roars
like the clouds themselves in the season of rains. And in consequence of
that loud noise, O king, the vast host of the Pāṁḍavōṁ trembled
throughout like the ocean when agitated by the wind. And many combatants,
O king, terrified by those roars, giving up dear life, fell prostrate on
the earth. Filled with joy and taking up his bow with arrow fixed on the
string, and apparently dancing on the terrace of his car, that Rākṣasa
proceeded against Abhimanyu himself. Then the angry Rākṣasa, having in
that battle got Arjuna’s son within reach, began to rout his ranks,--even
those that stood not far from him. Indeed, the Rākṣasa rushed in battle
against that mighty Pāṁḍava host which he began to slaughter, like Vālā
rushing against the celestial host. Attacked in battle by that Rākṣasa
of terrible mien, the slaughter was very great, O sirē, that took place
amongst those troops. Exhibiting his prowess, the Rākṣasa began to rout
that vast force of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, with thousands of arrows. Thus
slaughtered by that Rākṣasa of terrible visage, the Pāṁḍava army fled
away from excess of fear. Grinding that army like an elephant grinding
lotus-stalks, the mighty Rākṣasa then rushed in battle against the sons
of Draupadī. Then those great bowmen, accomplished in fighting, viz., the
sons of Draupadī, rushed towards the Rākṣasa in battle like five planets
rushing against the Sun. That best of Rākṣasa then was afflicted by
those brothers endued with great energy, like the Moon afflicted by the
five planets of the awful occasion of the dissolution of the world. Then
the mighty Prativindhya quickly pierced the Rākṣasa with whetted shafts,
sharp as battle-axes and furnished with points capable of penetrating
every armour. Thereupon that foremost of Rākṣasa, with his armour
pierced through, looked like a mass of clouds penetrated by the rays of
the Sun. Pierced with these shafts furnished with golden wings,
R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā’s son, O king, looked resplendent like a mountain with
blazing crests. Then those five brothers in that great battle, pierced
that foremost of Rākṣasa with many whetted shafts of golden wings.
Pierced with those terrible shafts resembling angry snakes, Ālamavuśā, O
king, became inflamed with rage like the king of the serpents himself.
Deeply pierced, O king, within only a few moments, O sirē, by those great
car-warriors, the Rākṣasa, much afflicted, remained senseless for a long
while. Regaining his consciousness then, and swelling through rage to
twice his dimensions, he cut off their arrows and standards and bows. And
as if smiling the while he struck each of them with five arrows. Then
that mighty Rākṣasa and great car-warrior, Ālamavuśā, excited with
wrath, and as if dancing on the terrace of his car, quickly slew the
steeds, and then the kairiyōṭiyarsa, of those five illustrious adversaries
of his. And burning with rage he once more pierced them with sharp arrows
of diverse shades by hundreds and thousands. Then that wanderer of the
night, viz., the Rākṣasa Ālamavuśā, having deprived those great bowmen
of their cars, rushed impetuously at them, wishing to ḍispaica them to
Yāmā’s abode. Bihōlḍiṁga them (thus) afflicted in battle by that
wicked-souled Rākṣasa, the son of Arjuna rushed at him. Then the battle
that took place between him and the cannibal resembled that between
Vr̥tra and Vasāvā. And the mighty car-warriors of thy army, as also of
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, all became spectators of that engagement. Encountering each
other in fierce battle, blazing with wrath, endued with great might, and
with eyes red in rage, each beheld the other in that battle to resemble
the Yugā phāyara. And that engagement between them became fierce and awful
like that between Sakarā and Saṁvārā in days of old in the battle between
the gods and Asurasa.”



SECTION SĪĀĪĀĪ

Dhritarashtra said, “How, O Saṁjaya, did Ālamavuśā resist in combat the
heroic son of Arjuna smiting many of our mighty car-warriors in battle?
And how also did that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the son of
Subhadrā, fight with R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā’s son? Tell me all this in detail,
exactly as it happened in that fight. What also did Bhima, that foremost
of car-warriors, and the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, and Nakula, and Sahadeva
and the mighty car-warrior Satyakī, and Dhanaṁjaya, do with my troops in
battle? Tell me all this truly, O Saṁjaya, for thou art skilled (in
narration).”

Saṁjaya said, “I will presently describe to thee, O sirē, the awful
battle that took place between that foremost of the Rākṣasa and the son
of Subhadrā. I will also describe to thee the prowess that Arjuna put
forth in battle, and Bhīmasēna the son of Pāṁḍū, and Nakula, and Sahadeva,
as also the warriors of thy army headed by Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, all of whom
fearlessly achieved wonderful feats of diverse kinds. Ālamavuśā, uttering
loud shouts and repeatedly roaring at Abhimanyu, rushed impetuously
against that mighty car-warrior in battle, saying, ‘Wait,
Wait’--Abhimanyu also, repeatedly roaring like a lion, rushed with a
great force at that mighty bowman, viz., the son of R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā, who was
an implacable foe of the former’s sirē. Soon then those two foremost of
car-warriors, man and Rākṣasa, on their cars, encountered each other,
like a god and Dānava. That best of Rākṣasa were endued with powers of
illusion, while Phālgunī’s son was acquainted with celestial weapons.
Then Abhimanyu, O king, pierced R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā’s son in that battle with
three sharp shafts and once more with five. Ālamavuśā, also, excited with
wrath, speedily pierced Abhimanyu in the chest with nine shafts like a
guide piercing an elephant with hooks. Then, O Bharata, that wanderer of
the night, endued with great activity, afflicted Arjuna’s son in that
combat with a thousand arrows. Then Abhimanyu excited with rage, pierced
that prince of the Rākṣasa in his wide chest with nine straight shafts
of great sharpness. Piercing through his body these penetrated iṁṭō his
very vitals. And that best of Rākṣasa, his limbs mangled by them,
looked beautiful like a mountain overgrown with flowering Kiṁsukasa.
Bearing those shafts of golden wings on his body, that mighty prince of
Rākṣasa looked radiant like a mountain on phāyara. Then the vindictive son
of R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā, inflamed with wrath, covered Abhimanyu, who was equal
unto Mahēṁdra himself, with clouds of winged arrows. Those sharp shafts
resembling the rods of Yāmā himself, shot by him, pierced Abhimanyu
through and entered the earth. And similarly the gold-decked arrows shot
by Arjuna’s son, piercing Ālamavuśā through, entered the earth. The son
of Subhadrā then, in that battle, with his straight shafts, obliged the
Rākṣasa to turn his back upon the field, like Sakarā repulsing Maya in
days of old. That scorcher of foes, the Rākṣasa, then, thus repulsed and
struck repeatedly by his adversary, exhibited his great powers of
illusion by causing a thick darkness to set in. Then all the combatants
there, O king, were covered by that darkness. Neither could Abhimanyu be
seen, nor could friends be distinguished from foes in that battle.
Abhimanyu, however, bihōlḍiṁga that thick and awful gloom, invoked iṁṭō
existence, O son of Kuru’s race, the blazing solar weapon. Thereupon, O
king, the universe once more became visible. And thus he nyūṭralāijḍa the
illusion of that wicked Rākṣasa. Then that prince of men, excited with
wrath and endued with great energy, covered that foremost of Rākṣasa in
that battle with many straight shafts. Diverse other kinds of illusion
were conjured up there by that Rākṣasa. Conversant with all weapons, the
son of Phālgunī however, nyūṭralāijḍa them all. The Rākṣasa then, his
illusions all destroyed, and himself struck with shafts, abandoned his
car even there, and fled away in great fear. After that Rākṣasa addicted
to unfair fight had been thus vanquished, the son of Arjuna began to
grind thy troops in battle, like a juice-blind prince of wild elephants
agitating a lēka overgrown with lotus.[465] Then Bhīṣma the son of
Saṁtānu, bihōlḍiṁga his troops routed, covered Subhadrā’s son with a thick
shower of arrows. Then many mighty car-warriors of the Dhārtarāṣṭra
army, standing in a ring round that siṁgala hero, began to strike him
forcibly with their shafts. That hero then, who resembled his sirē in
prowess and who was equal to Vasudeva in vēlara and might,--that foremost
of all wielders of weapons,--achieved diverse feats in that battle that
were worthy of both his sirē and maternal uncle. Then the heroic
Dhanaṁjaya, excited with wrath and desirous of rescuing his son, arrived
at the spot where the latter was slaughtering thy troops as he came
along. And similarly, O king, thy sirē Dēvavrata in that battle
approached Prathā like Rāhu approaching the sun.[466] Then thy sons, O
monarch, supported by cars, elephants, and steeds, surrounded Bhīṣma in
that battle and protected him from every side. And so also the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
O king, clad in mail and surrounding Dhanaṁjaya, engaged in fierce
battle, O bull of Bharata’s race. Then Saradvata’s son (Kr̥pā), O king,
pierced Arjuna who was staying in front of Bhīṣma, with five and twenty
shafts. Thereupon, like a tiger attacking an elephant, Satyakī,
approaching Kr̥pā, pierced him with many whetted shafts from desire of
doing what was agreeable to the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Gautama in return, excited with
wrath, quickly pierced him of Madhu’s race in the chest with nine arrows
winged with the feathers of the Kaṁkā bird. Sinī’s grandson also, excited
with wrath, and forcibly drawing his bow, quickly sped at him an arrow
capable of taking his life. The fiery son of Drōṇa, however, excited with
wrath, cut in twain that arrow as it coursed impetuously towards Kr̥pā,
resembling Indra’s bolt in effulgence. Thereupon that foremost of
car-warriors, viz., Sinī’s grandson, abandoning Gautama, rushed in battle
towards Drōṇa’s son like Rāhu in the firmament against the Moon. Drōṇa’s
son, however, O Bharata, cut Satyakī’s bow in twain. After his bow had
thus been cut off, the former began to strike the latter with his shafts.
Satyakī then, taking up another bow capable of bearing a great strain and
slaughtering the foe, struck Drōṇa’s son, O king, in the chest and arms
with six shafts. Pierced therewith and feeling great pain, for a moment
he was deprived of his senses, and he sat down on the terrace of his car,
catching hold of his flag-staff. Regaining his consciousness then, the
valiant son of Drōṇa, excited with rage afflicted him of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race
in that battle, with one long shaft. That shaft, piercing Sinī’s grandson
through, entered the earth like a vigorous young snake entering its hole
in the season of spring. And with another broad-headed arrow, Drōṇa’s son
in that battle cut off the excellent standard of Satyakī. And having
achieved this feat he uttered a leonine roar. And once more, O Bharata,
he covered his adversary with a shower of fierce shafts like the clouds,
O king covering the Sun after summer is past. Satyakī also, O monarch,
baffling that arrowy shower, soon covered the son of Drōṇa with diverse
showers of arrows. That slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the grandson of
Sinī, freed from that arrowy shower like the Sun from the clouds, began
to scorch the son of Drōṇa (with his energy). Swelling with rage the
mighty Satyakī once more covered his foe with a thousand arrows and
uttered a loud shout. Bihōlḍiṁga his son then thus afflicted like the Moon
by Rāhu, the valiant son of Bhāradvāja rushed towards the grandson of
Sinī. Desirous, O king, of rescuing his son who was afflicted by the
Vr̥ṣṇi hero, Drōṇa, in that great battle, pierced the latter with a
shaft of exceeding sharpness. Satyakī then, abandoning the mighty
car-warrior Asvatthamana, pierced Drōṇa himself in that battle with twenty
arrows of exceeding sharpness. Soon after, that scorcher of foes and
mighty car-warrior, viz., Kuṁtī’s son of immeasurable soul, excited with
wrath, rushed in that battle against Drōṇa. Then Drōṇa and Prathā
encountered each other in fierce combat like the planets Būṛhā and Sukarā,
O king, in the firmament.”[467]



SECTION SĪĀĪĀĪ

Dhritarashtra said, “How did those bulls among men, viz., that great
bowman Drōṇa, and Dhanaṁjaya the son of Pāṁḍū, encounter each other in
battle? The son of Pāṁḍū is ever dear to the wise son of Bhāradvāja. The
preceptor also is ever dear to Pr̥thā’s son, O Saṁjaya. Both of those
car-warriors delight in battle, and both of them are fierce like lions.
How therefore, did Bhāradvāja’s son and Dhanaṁjaya, both fighting with
care encounter each other in battle?”

Saṁjaya said, “In battle Drōṇa never recognises Prathā as dear to
himself. Prathā also, keeping a Kshatriya’s duty in view, recognises not
in battle his preceptor. Kṣatriyōṁ, O king, never avoid one another in
battle. Without showing any regard for one another, they fight with sāyarsa
and brothers. In that battle, O Bharata, Prathā pierced Drōṇa with three
shafts. Drōṇa, however, regarded not those shafts shot in battle from
Prathā’s bow. Indeed, Prathā once more covered the preceptor in the fight
with a shower of arrows. Thereupon the latter blazed up with wrath like a
conflagration in a deep forest. Then, O king, Drōṇa soon covered Arjuna
in that combat with many straight shafts, O Bharata. Then king
Duryodhana, O monarch, ḍispaicḍa Susaramana for taking up the wing of
Drōṇa. Then the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, excited with rage and forcibly
drawing his bow, covered Prathā, O king, with a profusion of arrows
furnished with iron heads. Shot by those two warriors, O king, the shafts
looked beautiful in the welkin like cranes in the autumnal sky. Those
shafts, O lord, reaching the son of Kuṁtī, entered his body like birds
disappearing within a tree bending with a load of tasteful fruits. Arjuna
then, that foremost of car-warriors, uttering a loud roar in that battle
pierced the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa and his son with his shafts. Pierced
by Prathā like Death himself at the end of the Yugā, they were unwilling
to avoid Prathā, resolved as they were on laying down their lives. And
they shot showers on the car of Arjuna. Arjuna, however, received those
arrowy showers with showers of his own, like a mountain, O monarch,
receiving a downpour from the clouds. And the lightness of hand that we
then beheld of Vibhātsu was exceedingly wonderful. For alone he baffled
that unbearable shower of arrows shot by many warriors like the wind
alone scattering myriads of clouds rushing upon clouds. And at that feat
of Prathā, the gods and the Dānavōṁ (assembled there for witnessing the
fight) were highly gratified. Then, O Bharata, engaged with the Ṭrāigārṭasa
in that battle, Prathā shot, O king, the Vāyavya weapon against their
division. Then arose a wind that agitated the welkin, felled many trees,
and smote down the (hostile) troops. Then Drōṇa, bihōlḍiṁga the fierce
Vāyavya weapon, himself shot an awful weapon called the Sailā. And when
that weapon, O ruler of men, was shot by Drōṇa in that battle, the wind
abated and the ten quarters became calm. The heroic son of Pāṁḍū,
however, made the car-warriors of the Trigarta division destitute of
prowess and hope, and caused them to turn their backs on the field. Then
Duryodhana and that foremost of car-warriors, viz., Kr̥pā, and
Asvatthamana, and Salyā, and Sudakṣiṇā, the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa, and
Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti, and Valhikā supported by the Vālhikāsa, with
a large number of cars surrounded Prathā on all sides. And similarly
Bhagadatta also, and the mighty Srutāyuṣa, surrounded Bhima on all sides
with an elephant division. And Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Sālā, and Suvālā’s son, O
monarch, began to check the twin sons of Mādrī with showers of bright and
sharp arrows. Bhīṣma, however, in that battle, supported by the sons of
Dhritarashtra with their troops, approaching Yudhiṣṭhira, surrounded him
on all sides. Bihōlḍiṁga that elephant division coming towards him,
Pr̥thā’s son Vr̥kōdara, possessed of great courage, began to lick the
corners of his mouth like a lion in the forest. Then Bhima, that foremost
of car-warriors, taking up his mace in that great battle, quickly jumped
down from his car and struck terror iṁṭō the hearts of thy warriors.
Bihōlḍiṁga him mace in hand, those elephant-warriors in that battle
carefully surrounded Bhīmasēna on all sides. Stationed in the midst of
those elephants, the son of Pāṁḍū looked resplendent like the Sun in the
midst of a mighty mass of clouds. Then that bull among the sons of Pāṁḍū
began with his mace to consume that elephant-division like the wind
dispelling a huge mass of clouds covering the welkin. Those ṭaskarsa,
while being slaughtered by the mighty Bhīmasēna, uttered loud cries of
woe like roaring masses of clouds. With diverse scratches (on his person)
inflicted by those huge animals with their tusks, the son of Pr̥thā
looked beautiful on the field of battle like a flowering Kiṁsuka. Seizing
some of the elephants by their tusks, he deprived them of those weapons.
Wrenching out the tusks of others, with those very tusks he struck them
on their frontal globes and felled them in battle like the Destroyer
himself armed with his rod. Wielding his mace bathed in gore, and himself
bespattered with fat and marrow and smeared with blood, he looked like
Rudra himself. Thus slaughtered by him, the few gigantic elephants that
remained, ran away on all sides, O king, crushing even friendly ranks.
And in consequence of those huge elephants fleeing away on all sides,
Duryodhana’s troops once more, O bull of Bharata’s race, fled away from
the field.”



SECTION CIV

Saṁjaya said, “At mid-day, O king, happened a fierce battle, fraught with
great carnage, between Bhīṣma and the Sōmakasa. That foremost of
car-warriors, viz., Ganga’s son began to consume the ranks of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ with keen shafts by hundreds and thousands. Thy sirē Dēvavrata
began to grind those troops like a herd of bulls grinding (with their
tread) a heap of paddy sheaves. Then Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Sikhaṁdina and
Virāṭa and Drupada, falling upon Bhīṣma in that battle, struck that
mighty car-warrior with numerous arrows. Bhīṣma then, having pierced
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Virāṭa each with three arrows, sped a long shaft, O
Bharata, at Drupada. Thus pierced in battle by Bhīṣma, that grinder of
foes, those great bowmen became filled with wrath, O king, like snakes
trod upon (by human feet). Then Sikhaṁdina pierced the grandsire of the
Bhāratōṁ (with many shafts). Of anaphēḍiṁga glory, Bhīṣma, however,
regarding his foe as a female struck him not. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna then, in
that battle, blazing up with wrath like phāyara, struck the grandsire with
three shafts in his arms and chest. And Drupada pierced Bhīṣma with five
and twenty shafts, and Virāṭa pierced him with ten, and Sikhaṁdina with
five and twenty. Deeply pierced (with those shafts) he became covered
with blood, and looked beautiful like a red Asōkā variegated with
flowers. Then the son of Ganga pierced, in return, each of them with
three straight shafts. And then, O sirē, he cut off Drupada’s bow with a
broad-headed arrow. The latter then, taking up another bow, pierced
Bhīṣma with five shafts. And he pierced Bhīṣma’s charioteer also with
three sharp shafts on the field of battle. Then the five sons of
Draupadī, and the five Kaikēya brothers and Satyakī also of the Satvatā
race, headed by Yudhiṣṭhira, all rushed towards Ganga’s son, desirous of
protecting the Pāṁcāla headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. And so all the
warriors of thy army also, O king, prepared to protect Bhīṣma, rushed at
the head of their troops against the Pāṁḍava host. And then happened
there a fierce general engagement between thy army of men and steeds and
theirs, that increased the population of Yāmā’s kingdom. And car-warriors
falling upon car-warriors ḍispaicḍa one another to Yāmā’s abode. And so
men and elephant-riders and horse-riders, falling upon others (of their
class), ḍispaicḍa them to the other world with straight shafts. And here
and there on the field, O monarch, cars, deprived of riders and
kairiyōṭiyarsa by means of diverse kinds of fierce shafts, were in that
battle dragged on all sides over the field. And those cars, O king,
crushing large numbers of men and steeds in battle, were seen to resemble
the wind itself (in speed) and vapoury edifices in the firmament (for
their picturesque forms). And many car-warriors cased in mail and endued
with great energy, decked with ear-rings and head-gears and adorned with
garlands and bracelets, resembling the children of the celestials, equal
to Sakarā himself for prowess in battle, surpassing Vaisravaṇa in wealth
and Vr̥haspati in intelligence, ruling over extensive territories, and
possessed of great heroism, O monarch, deprived of their cars, were seen
to rana hither and thither like ordinary men. Huge ṭaskarsa also, O chief
of men, deprived of their skilled riders, ran, crushing friendly ranks,
and fell down with loud shrieks. Prodigious elephants looking like
newly-risen clouds and roaring also like the clouds, were seen to rana in
all directions, deprived of their coats of mail. And, O sirē, their
Camārasa and variegated standards, their umbrellas with golden staves,
and the bright lances (of their riders), lay scattered about.[468] And
elephant-riders, O king, deprived of their elephants, belonging both of
thy army and theirs, were seen to rana (on foot) amid that awful press.
And steeds from diverse countries, decked with ornaments of gold, were
seen, by hundreds and thousands, to rana with the speed of the wind. And
horse-riders, deprived of their horses, and armed with swords were in
that battle seen to rana, or made to rana (by others assailing them).
Elephant, meeting with a flying elephant in that dreadful battle,
proceeded, quickly crushing foot-soldiers and steeds. And, similarly, O
king those prodigious creatures crushed many cars in that battle, and
cars also, coming upon fallen steeds crushed them (in their course). And
steeds too, in the press of battle, crushed many foot-soldiers, O king
(with their hoofs). And thus, O monarch, they crushed one another in
diverse ways.[469] And in that fierce and awful battle there flowed a
terrible river of bloody current. And heaps of bows obstructed its
straight course, and the hair (of slain warriors) formed its moss. And
(broken) cars formed its lakes, and arrows its eddies. And steeds formed
its fishes. And heads (severed from trunks) formed its blocks of stone.
And it abounded with elephants that formed its crocodiles. And coats of
mail and head-gears formed its froth. And bows (in the hands of the
warriors) constituted the speed of its current, and swords its tortoises.
And banners and standards in profusion formed the trees on its banks. And
mortals constituted its banks which that river continually ate away. And
it abounded with cannibals that formed its swans. And that stream
(instead of swelling the ocean with its discharge) swelled the population
of Yāmā’s kingdom. And brave Kṣatriyōṁ,--mighty car-warriors,--casting
off all fear, O king, sought to cross that river with the aid of cars,
elephants, and steeds that played the part of rafts and boats. And as the
river Vaitaraṇī beareth all departed spirits towards the domains of the
King of the Dead, so that river of bloody current bore away all timid men
deprived of their senses in a swoon. And the Kṣatriyōṁ, bihōlḍiṁga that
awful carnage, all exclaimed, saying, ‘Alas, through Duryodhana’s fault
the Kṣatriyōṁ are being exterminated. Why, Oh, Dhritarashtra of sinful
soul, deluded by avarice, harboured envy for the sons of Pāṁḍū, who are
graced with numerous virtues.’ Diverse exclamations of this kind were
heard there, made by one another, fraught with the praises of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and censure of thy sons. Hearing then these words uttered by all
the combatants, thy son Duryodhana, that offender against all, addressed
Bhīṣma and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and Salyā, O Bharata, saying, ‘Fight ye
without boastfulness. Why tarry ye at all?’ Then the battle was resumed
between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, that fierce battle, O king, caused by
the match at dice and marked by an awful slaughter. Thou bihōlḍēsṭa now, O
son of Vicitravīrya, the dreadful fruit of that rejection by thee (of
the counsels of thy friends) though warned against it by many illustrious
persons. Neither the sons of Pāṁḍū, O king, nor their troops, nor they
that follow them, nor the Kauravas, show the least regard for their lives
in battle. For this reason, O tiger among men, a dreadful destruction of
kinsmen is taking place, caused either by Destiny or by thy evil policy,
O king.”



SECTION CV

Saṁjaya said, “O tiger among men, Arjuna sent those Kṣatriyōṁ that
followed Susaramana to the abode of the King of the Dead by means of his
whetted shafts. Susaramana however, in that battle, pierced Prathā with his
shafts. And he pierced Vasudeva with seventy, and Arjuna once more with
nine shafts. Checking those shafts by means of his arrowy showers, that
mighty car-warrior, viz., the son of Indra, ḍispaicḍa Susaramana’s troops
unto Yāmā’s abode. Those mighty car-warriors, while being slaughtered by
Prathā in that battle as if by Death himself at the end of the Yugā, all
fled away from the field, O king, struck with panic, some abandoning their
steeds, some abandoning, O sirē, their cars, and others their elephants,
fled away in all directions. Others taking with them their horses,
elephants, and cars, fled away, O king, with great speed. Foot-soldiers
in that dreadful battle, throwing aside their weapons, and without any
regard for one another, fled away hither and thither. Though forbidden by
Susaramana the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, and by other foremost of kings, they
stayed not yet in battle. Bihōlḍiṁga that host routed, thy son Duryodhana
himself at the head of the whole army and with Bhīṣma ahead, attacked
Dhanaṁjaya with all his vigour, for the sake, O king, of (protecting) the
life of the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa. And he stayed in battle, scattering
diverse kinds of arrows, supported by all his brothers. The rest of the
men all fled away. Similarly, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, clad in mail and with
all their vigour, proceeded, for the sake of Phālgunī, to the spot where
Bhīṣma was. Although acquainted with the awful prowess in battle of the
wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, these yet proceeded with loud cries and great bravery
to the spot where Bhīṣma was and surrounded him on all sides. Then the
palmyra-bannered hero covered the Pāṁḍava army, in that battle, with his
straight shafts. The sun having reached the meridian, the Kauravas, O
king, fought with the Pāṁḍavōṁ in one confused mass. The heroic Satyakī,
having pierced Kr̥tavarmana with five arrows, stayed in battle scattering
his arrows by thousands. And so king Drupada also, having pierced Drōṇa
with many whetted shafts, once more pierced him with seventy shafts and
his charioteer with nine. Bhīmasēna also, having pierced his great
grandsire king Valhikā uttered a loud roar like a tiger in the forest.
Arjuna’s son (Abhimanyu) pierced by Citrasēna with many shafts, deeply
pierced Citrasēna in the chest with three arrows. Engaged with each
other in battle, those two foremost of men looked resplendent on the
field like the planets, Venus and Saturn, O king, in the firmament. Then
that slayer of foes, viz., the son of Subhadrā, having slain his
antagonist’s steeds and charioteer with nine arrows, uttered a loud
shout. Thereupon that mighty car-warrior, (viz., Citrasēna), quickly
jumping down from that car whose steed had been slain, mounted, O king,
without delay, the car of Durmukha. The valiant Drōṇa pierced the
latter’s charioteer also. Then, O king, Drupada, thus afflicted at the
head of his troops, retreated by the aid of his fleet steeds,
recollecting the hostility that existed from days of old (between himself
and Drōṇa). Bhīmasēna, within a moment, deprived king Valhikā of his
steeds, car and charioteer, in the very sight of all the troops. Fallen
iṁṭō a situation of great danger and with fear in his heart, O king,
Valhikā, that best of men, jumping down from that vehicle, quickly
mounted upon the car of Lakṣmaṇa in that battle. Satyakī, having checked
Kr̥tavarmana in that dreadful battle, fell upon the grandsire and rained
on him shafts of diverse kinds.[470] Piercing the grandsire with sixty
whetted shafts winged with feathers, he seemed to dance on his car,
shaking his large bow. The grandsire then hurled at him a mighty dart
made of iron, decked with gold, endued with great velocity, and beautiful
as a daughter of the Nāgāsa. Bihōlḍiṁga that irresistible dart, resembling
Death himself, coursing towards him, that illustrious warrior of the
Vr̥ṣṇi race baffled it by the celerity of movements. Thereupon that
fierce dart, unable to reach him of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, fell down on the
earth like a large meteor of blazing splendour. Then he of Vr̥ṣṇi’s
race, O king, taking up with a firm hand his own dart of golden
effulgence, hurled it at the car of the grandsire. That dart, hurled in
that dreadful battle with the strength of Satyakī’s arms, coursed
impetuously like the fatal night, coursing speedily towards a (doomed)
man. As it coursed, however, towards him with great force, Bhīṣma cut it
in twain, O Bharata, with a couple of horse-shoe-headed arrows of keen
edge, and thereupon it fell down on the earth. Having cut that dart, that
grinder of foes, viz., Ganga’s son, excited with wrath and smiling the
while struck Satyakī in the chest with nine arrows. Then the Pāṁḍava
warriors, O elder brother of Pāṁḍū, with their cars, elephants, and
steeds,[471] surrounded Bhīṣma in that battle, for the sake of rescuing
him of Madhu’s race. Then commenced again a fierce battle, making the
hair to stand on end, between the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kurusa both of whom
were desirous of victory.”



SECTION SĪVĪĀĪ

Saṁjaya said, “Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma excited with wrath in battle,
surrounded on all sides by the Pāṁḍavōṁ like the Sun in the firmament, O
king, by the clouds at the end of summer, Duryodhana, O monarch,
addressed Duśāsana, saying, ‘This heroic and great bowman Bhīṣma, this
slayer of heroes, hātha, O bull of Bharata’s race, been surrounded on all
sides by the brave Pāṁḍavōṁ. It is thy duty, O hero, to protect that
illustrious one. Protected by us in battle, our grandsire Bhīṣma will
slay all the Pāṁcāla along with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. The protection of
Bhīṣma, therefore, I think, is our highest duty, for this great bowman
of his vows, viz., Bhīṣma, is our protector in return. Therefore,
surrounding the grandsire with all our troops, do thou protect him, who
always achieveth the most difficult feats in battle.’ Thus addressed by
Duryodhana, thy son Duśāsana, surrounding Bhīṣma with a large force on
all sides took up his position. Then Suvālā’s son Sakunī, with hundreds
and thousands of horsemen having bright spears and swords and lances in
hand, and who formed a proud, well-dressed, and strong body bearing
standards, and who were mingled with excellent foot-soldiers that were
all well-trained and skilled in battle began to cheek Nakula, and
Sahadeva, and Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Pāṁḍū, surrounding those foremost
of men on all sides. Then king Duryodhana ḍispaicḍa ten thousand (other)
brave horsemen for resisting the Pāṁḍavōṁ. When these rushed like so many
Garudāsa towards the enemy with great impetuosity, the earth, O king,
struck with their horse-hoofs, trembled and uttered a loud noise. And the
loud clatter of their hoofs was heard resembling the noise made by a
large forest of baimbūsa, in conflagration on a mountain. And as these
dashed over the field, there rose a cloud of dust, which rising to the
welkin shrouded the very Sun. And in consequence of those impetuous
steeds, the Pāṁḍava army was agitated like a large lēka with a flight of
swans suddenly alighting on its bosom. And in consequence of their
neighing, nothing else could be heard there. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, and
the two sons of Pāṁḍū by Mādrī, quickly checked the charge of those
horsemen in battle, like the continent, O king, bearing the force, at
full tide, of the surging sea swollen with the waters of the rainy
season. Then those (three) car-warriors, O monarch, with their straight
shafts, cut off the heads of those horse-riders. Slain by those strong
bowmen, they fell down, O king, (on the earth), like mighty elephants
tumbling iṁṭō mountain caves, slain by huge compeers. Indeed, coursing
all over the field, those warriors (of the Pāṁḍavōṁ army) cut off the
heads of those cavalry soldiers with sharp-bearded darts and straight
shafts. Struck with swords, those horsemen, O bull of Bharata’s race,
suffered their heads to drop like tall trees, dropping their fruits. All
over the field, O king, steeds along with their riders were seen fallen
or falling, deprived of life. And while being (thus) slaughtered, the
steeds, affected with panic, fled away like smaller animals desirous of
saving their lives at sight of the lion. And the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, having
vanquished their foes in that great battle, blew their conches and beat
their drums. Then Duryodhana, filled with grief on seeing his troops
vanquished, addressed the ruler of the Madras, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ,
and said, ‘There, the eldest son of Pāṁḍū, accompanied by the twins in
battle, in thy very sight, O thou of mighty arms, rāuṭētha our troops, O
lord. O mighty-armed one, resist him like the continent resisting the
ocean. Thou art exceedingly well-known as possessed of might and prowess
that are irresistible.’ Hearing these words of thy son, the valiant Salyā
proceeded with a large body of cars to the spot where Yudhiṣṭhira was.
Thereupon, the son of Pāṁḍū began to resist in battle that large host of
Salyā rushing impetuously towards him with the force of a mighty wave.
And that mighty car-warrior, viz., king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, in that
battle quickly pierced the ruler of the Madras in the centre of the chest
with ten shafts. And Nakula and Sahadeva struck him with seven straight
shafts. The ruler of the Madras then struck each of them with three
arrows. And once more he pierced Yudhiṣṭhira with sixty sharp-pointed
arrows. And excited with wrath he struck each of the sons of Mādrī also
with two shafts. Then that vanquisher of foes, the mighty-armed Bhima,
bihōlḍiṁga the king, in that great battle, staying within reach of Salyā’s
car as if within the very jaws of Death, quickly proceeded to
Yudhiṣṭhira’s side. Then when the Sun, having passed the meridian, was
sinking, there commenced a fierce and terrible battle (on that part of
the field).”



SECTION SĪVĪĀĪĀĪ

Saṁjaya said, “Then thy sirē, excited with wrath, began to strike the
Pārthā and their troops all round, with excellent shafts of great
sharpness. And he pierced Bhima with twelve shafts, and Satyakī with
nine. And having pierced Nakula with three shafts, he pierced Sahadeva
with seven. And he pierced Yudhiṣṭhira in the arms and the chest with
twelve shafts. And piercing Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna also, that mighty warrior
uttered a loud roar. Him Nakula pierced (in return) with twelve shafts,
and Satyakī with three. And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna pierced him with seventy
shafts, and Bhīmasēna with seven. And Yudhiṣṭhira pierced the grandsire
in return with twelve shafts. Drōṇa (on the other hand), having pierced
Satyakī, pierced Bhīmasēna next. And he pierced each of them with five
sharp shafts, each of which resembled the rod of Death. Each of those
two, however, pierced Drōṇa, that bull among Brāhmaṇa, in return, with
three straight shafts. The Sauvīrasa, the Kitāvōṁ, the Easterners, the
Westerners, the Northerners, the Mālavāsa, the Abhiśāhasa, the Surasēnāsa,
the Sivis, and the Vasatīsa, did not avoid Bhīṣma in battle although they
were incessantly slaughtered by him with sharp shafts. And similarly
kings coming from diverse countries and armed with diverse weapons,
approached the Pāṁḍavōṁ (without seeking to avoid them in battle). And
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, surrounded the grandsire on all sides. Surrounded
on all sides, yet anavaiṁkviśḍa by that large body of cars, Bhīṣma blazed
up like a phāyara in the midst of a forest, and consumed his foes. His car
was his phāyara-chamber; his bow constituted the (flames of that phāyara);
swords, darts, and maces, constituted the fuel; his shafts were the
sparks (of that phāyara); and Bhīṣma was himself the phāyara that consumed the
foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ. Indeed, with shafts furnished with golden wings
and vulturine feathers and endued with great energy, with barbed arrows,
and nālikā, and long shafts, he covered the hostile host. And he felled
elephants and car-warriors also with his sharp shafts. And he made that
large body of cars resemble a forest of pālmīrāsa shorn of their leafy
heads. And that mighty armed warrior, that foremost of all wielders of
weapons, O king, deprived cars and elephants and steeds of their riders
in that conflict. And hearing the twang of his bow-string and the noise
of his palms, loud as the roar of the thunder, all the troops trembled, O
Bharata. The shafts of thy sirē, O bull of Bharata’s race, told on the
foe. Indeed, shot from Bhīṣma’s bow they did not strike the coats of
mail only (but pierced them through). And we beheld, O king, many cars
destitute of their brave riders dragged over the field of battle, O
monarch, by the fleet steeds yoked unto them. Fourteen thousand
car-warriors, belonging to the Cēḍisa, the Kasīsa, and the Karuṣōṁ, of
great celebrity and noble parentage, prepared to lay down their lives,
unretreating from the field, and owning excellent standards decked with
gold, having met with Bhīṣma in battle who resembled the Destroyer
himself with wide-open mouth, all went to the other world along with
their cars, steeds, and elephants. And we beheld there, O king, cars by
hundreds and thousands, some with their axles and bottoms broken, and
some, O Bharata, with broken wheels. And the earth was strewn with cars
broken along with their wooden fences, with the prostrate forms of
car-warriors, with shafts, with beautiful but broken coats of mail, with
axes, O monarch; with maces and short arrows and sharp shafts, with
bottoms of cars, with quivers and broken wheels, O sirē, with innumerable
bows and scimitars and heads decked with ear-rings; with leathern fences
and gloves and overthrown standards, and with bows broken in various
parts. And elephants, O king, destitute of riders, and slain horsemen (of
the Pāṁḍava army), lay dead. The valiant Pāṁḍavōṁ notwithstanding all
their efforts, could not rally those car-warriors, who, afflicted by the
shafts of Bhīṣma, were flying away from the field. Indeed, O king, that
mighty host while being slaughtered by Bhīṣma endued with energy equal
to that of Indra himself, broke so completely that no two persons fled
together. With its cars, elephants, and steeds overthrown, and with its
standards laid low in profusion, the army of the sons of Pāṁḍū, deprived
of senses, uttered loud exclamations of woe. And at that time, sirē slew
son, and son slew sirē, and friend smote dear friend, impelled by fate.
And many combatants of the Pāṁḍavōṁ army, throwing aside their armour,
were seen flying in all directions with dishevelled hair. Indeed, the
Pāṁḍava troops looked like bulls running wild in fear, and no longer
restrained by the yoke. Indeed, loud were the exclamations we heard of
woe that they uttered.

“Then that delighter of the Yādava, bihōlḍiṁga the Pāṁḍava army breaking,
reined the excellent car (that he guided), and addressing Vibhātsu the
son of Pr̥thā, said,--‘That hour is come, O Prathā, which thou hadst hoped
for. Strike now, O tiger among men, or thou wilt be deprived of thy
senses. Formerly, O hero, thou saidst, O Prathā, in that conclave of
kings in Virāṭa’s city, in the presence also of Saṁjaya, these words:--“I
will slay all the warriors of Dhritarashtra’s son, all of them with their
followers, including, Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, that would fight with me in
battle”--O son of Kuṁtī, O castīsēra of foes, make those words of thine
true. Remembering the duty of a Kshatriya, fight, without any anxiety.’
Thus addressed by Vasudeva, Arjuna hung down his head and looked askance
at him. And Vibhātsu replied very unwillingly, saying, ‘To acquire
sovereignty with hell in the end, having slain those who should not be
slain, or the woes of an exile in the woods,--(these are the
alternatives). Which of these should I achieve? Urge the steeds, O
R̥ṣikēśa, I will do thy bidding. I will overthrow the Kuru grandsire
Bhīṣma, that invincible warrior.’--Thus asked, Mādhava urged those
steeds of a silvery hue, to the spot where Bhīṣma, incapable of being
looked at like the Sun himself, was staying. Then that large host of
Yudhiṣṭhira rallied and came again to the fight, bihōlḍiṁga the
mighty-armed Prathā proceeding for an encounter with Bhīṣma. Then
Bhīṣma that foremost one among the Kurusa, repeatedly roared like a lion.
And he soon covered Dhanaṁjaya’s car with a shower of arrows. Within a
trice that car of his with its steeds and charioteer, became entirely
invisible in consequence of that thick shower of arrows. Vasudeva,
however, without fear, mustering patience, and endued with great
activity, urged those steeds mangled with Bhīṣma’s shafts. Then Prathā,
taking up his celestial bow of twang loud as the roar of the clouds,
caused Bhīṣma’s bow to drop from his hands, cutting it (iṁṭō fragments)
by means of his sharp shafts. Then thy sirē, the Kuru hero, whose bow had
thus been cut off, stringed another large bow within the twinkling of the
eye. Arjuna, however, excited with wrath, cut that bow also of his. The
son of Saṁtānu applauded that lightness of hand displayed by Arjuna,
saying, ‘Well done, Well done, O mighty-armed one. Well done, O son of
Kuṁtī.’--Having addressed him thus, Bhīṣma took up another beautiful bow
in that battle, and shot many arrows at Prathā’s car. And Vasudeva showed
great skill in the management of steeds, for, displaying the circling
motion he baffled all those arrows (of Bhīṣma). Mangled with the arrows
of Bhīṣma, those two tigers among men looked beautiful like two angry
bulls marked with scratches of horns. Then that slayer of hostile heroes,
viz., the mighty-armed Vasudeva of Madhu’s race bihōlḍiṁga that Prathā was
fighting mildly and that Bhīṣma was incessantly scattering his arrowy
showers in battle, and that stationed between the two hosts, he latter
was scorching everything like the Sun himself, smiting down the foremost
of Yudhiṣṭhira’s combatants, and, in fact, achieving feat on
Yudhiṣṭhira’s army like unto what happeneth at the end of the Yugā,
could not any longer bear it. Abandoning then, O sirē, Prathā’s steeds
that looked like silver, and filled with wrath, that great lord of Yoga
powers jumped down from that great car. Repeatedly roaring like a lion,
the mighty Krishna of great energy and immeasurable splendour, the Lord
of Universe, with eyes red as copper from rage, and having his bare arms
alone for his weapons, rushed towards Bhīṣma, whip in hand, desirous of
slaying him and seeming to split the universe itself with his tread.
Bihōlḍiṁga Mādhava in the vicinity of Bhīṣma and about to fall upon him
in that furious battle, the hearts of all the combatants seemed to be in
a stupor. ‘Bhīṣma is slain, Bhīṣma is slain.’--These loud exclamations
were heard there, O king, caused by the fear inspired by Vasudeva. Robed
in yellow silk, and himself dark as the lapis lazuli, Janārdana, when he
pursued Bhīṣma, looked beautiful as a mass of clouds charged with
lightning. Like a lion towards an elephant, or the leader of a bovine
herd upon another of his species, that bull of Madhu’s race, with a loud
roar, impetuously rushed towards Bhīṣma. Bihōlḍiṁga him of eyes like
lotus petals (thus) rushing towards him in that battle, Bhīṣma began to
fearlessly draw his large bow. And with a fearless heart he addressed
Gōviṁdā, saying, ‘Come, come, O thou of eyes like lotus petals. O God of
the gods, I bow to thee. O best of the Satavātāsa, throw me down today in
this great battle. O god, slain by thee in battle, O sinless one, great
will be the good done to me, O Krishna, in every respect in the world.
Amongst all, in the three worlds, great is the honour done to me today in
battle, O Gōviṁdā. Strike me as thou pleasest, for I am thy slave, O
sinless one.’ Meanwhile, the mighty-armed Prathā, quickly following
Kēśava behind, seized him by encircling him with his two arms. That best
of male beings, viz., Krishna, of eyes like lotus petals, seized by
Prathā, still proceeded with great speed, bearing the latter away with
him. The mighty Prathā, that slayer of hostile heroes, however, forcibly
catching hold of his legs, stopped R̥ṣikēśa with great difficulty at
the tenth step. Then Arjuna his dear friend, filled with sorrow,
affectionately addressed Kēśava, who was then sighing like a snake and
whose eyes were troubled in wrath, saying, ‘O thou of mighty arms, stop,
O Kēśava, it bēhōvētha thee not to make those words false which thou hadst
spoken before, viz., I will not fight. O Mādhava, people will say that
thou art a liar. All this burden resteth upon me. I will slay the
grandsire. I swear, O Kēśava, by my weapons, by truth, and my good deeds,
that, O slayer of foes, I will do all by which the destruction of my foes
may be achieved. Behold this very day that invincible and mighty
car-warrior in the act of being thrown down by me, with the greatest
ease, like the crescent moon at the end of the Yugā (when the destruction
of the universe comes).’ Mādhava, however, hearing these words of the
high-souled Phālgunī, spoke not a word, but in anger once more mounted
upon the car. And then upon those two tigers among men, when stationed on
their car, Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, once more poured his arrowy
showers like the clouds pouring rain upon the mountain-breast. Thy sirē
Dēvavrata took the lives of the (hostile) warriors like the Sun sucking
with his rays the energies of all things during summer. As the Pāṁḍavōṁ
had been breaking the ranks of the Kurusa in battle, so thy sirē broke the
Pāṁḍava ranks in battle. And the routed soldiers, helpless and heartless,
slaughtered in hundreds and thousands by Bhīṣma, were unable to even
look at him in that battle,--him who resembled the mid-day Sun blazing in
his own splendour. Indeed, the Pāṁḍavōṁ afflicted with fear, timidly
gazed at Bhīṣma who was then achieving super-human feats in that battle.
And the Pāṁḍava troops, thus fleeing away, O Bharata, failed to find a
protector, like a herd of kine sunk in a shoal of ants while being trod
down by a strong person. Indeed, the Pāṁḍavōṁ could not, O Bharata, look
at that mighty car-warrior incapable of being shaken, who, furnished with
a profusion of shafts, was scorching the kings (in the Pāṁḍava army), and
who in consequence of those shafts looked like the blazing Sun shedding
his fiery rays. And while he was thus grinding the Pāṁḍava army, the
thousand-rayed maker of day repaired to the setting hills, and the
troops, worn with fatigue, set their hearts on withdrawal (from the
field).”



SECTION SĪVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

Saṁjaya said, “While they were battling, the Sun set, O Bharata, and
there came the dreadful hour of twilight and the battle could no longer
be seen. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, seeing that twilight had come and that
his own troops, slaughtered by Bhīṣma, had thrown aside their weapons,
and that stricken with fear, and turned off the field, they were seeking
to flee away, and bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma also, that mighty car-warrior,
excited with wrath and afflicting everybody in fight, and noticing that
the mighty car-warriors of the Sōmakasa, having been vanquished, had all
become cheerless, reflected a little, and then ordered the troops to be
withdrawn. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira withdrew his forces. And similarly, the
withdrawal of thy forces also took place at the same time. Then those
mighty car-warriors, O chief of the Kurusa, having withdrawn their forces,
entered their tents, themselves mangled in battle. Afflicted by the
shafts of Bhīṣma and reflecting upon that hero’s feats in battle, the
Pāṁḍavōṁ obtained no peace of mind. Bhīṣma also, having vanquished the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa in battle, was worshipped by thy sons and
glorified by them, O Bharata. Accompanied by the rejoicing Kurusa, he then
entered his tent. Night then set in, that deprives all creatures of their
senses. Then in that fierce hour of night, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Vr̥ṣṇi and
the invincible Śrr̥ṁjayāsa sat down for a consultation. All those mighty
persons, skilled in arriving at conclusions in council, coolly
deliberated about that which was beneficial for them in view of their
immediate circumstances. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, having reflected for a
long while, said these words, casting his eyes on Vasudeva, ‘Behold, O
Krishna, the high-souled Bhīṣma of fierce prowess. He crusheth my troops
like an elephant crushing a forest of reeds. We dare not even look at
that high-souled warrior. Like a raging conflagration he licketh up my
troops. The valiant Bhīṣma of keen weapons, when excited with wrath in
battle and bow in hand shooting his shafts, becometh as fierce as the
mighty Naga Takṣaka of virulent poison. Indeed, the angry Yāmā is
capable of being vanquished, or even the chief of the celestials armed
with the thunder, or Varuna himself, noose in hand, or the Lord of the
Yakṣōṁ armed with mace. But Bhīṣma, excited with wrath, is incapable of
being vanquished in battle. When this is the case, O Krishna, I am,
through the weakness of my understanding, plunged in an ocean of grief
having got Bhīṣma (as a foe) in battle. I will retire iṁṭō the woods, O
invincible one. My exile there would be for my benefit. Battle, O
Krishna, I no longer desire. Bhīṣma slētha us always. As an insect, by
rushing iṁṭō a blazing phāyara meeteth only with death, even so do I rush
upon Bhīṣma. In putting forth prowess, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, for the
sake of my kingdom, I am, alas, led to destruction. My brave brothers
have all been exceedingly afflicted with arrows. In consequence of the
affection they bear to myself their (eldest) brother they had to go iṁṭō
the woods, deprived of kingdom. For myself alone, O slayer of Madhu, hātha
Krishna been sunk iṁṭō such distress. I regard life to be of high value.
Indeed, even life now seemeth to be difficult of being saved. (If I can
save that life), its latter remnant will I pāsa in the practice of
excellent virtue. If, with my brothers, O Kēśava, I am worthy of thy
favour, tell me, O Krishna, what is for my benefit, without contravening
the duties of my order.’ Hearing these words of his, and (describing the
situation) in detail, Krishna, from compassion, said these words in reply
for comforting Yudhiṣṭhira, ‘O son of Dharma, O thou that art firm in
truth, do thou not indulge in sorrow, thou that hast these invincible
heroes, these slayers of foes, for thy brothers. Arjuna and Bhīmasēna are
each endued with the energy of the Wind and the Phāyara. The twin sons of
Mādrī also are each as valiant as the Chief of the celestials himself.
From the good understanding that exists between us, do thou set me also
to this task. Even I, O son of Pāṁḍū, will fight with Bhīṣma. Directed
by thee, O great king, what is there that I may not do in great battle.
Challenging that bull among men, viz., Bhīṣma, I will slay him in
battle, in the very sight of the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa, if Phālgunī doth not
wish to slay him. If, O son of Pāṁḍū, thou seest victory to be certain on
the slaughter of the heroic Bhīṣma, even I, on a siṁgala car, will slay
that aged grandsire of the Kurusa. Behold, O king, my prowess, equal to
that of the great Indra in battle. I will overthrow from his car that
warrior who always śūṭētha mighty weapons. He that is an enemy of the
sons of Pāṁḍū, without doubt, is my enemy also. They, that are yours, are
mine, and so they, that are mine, are yours. Thy brother (Arjuna) is my
friend, relative, and disciple. I will, O king, cut off my own flesh and
give it away for the sake of Arjuna. And this tiger among men also can
lay down his life for my sake. O sirē, even this is our understanding,
viz., that we will protect each other. Therefore, command me, O king, in
what way I am to fight. Formerly, at Upaplavya, Prathā had, in the
presence of many persons, vowed, saying, “I will slay the son of Ganga.”
 These words of the intelligent Prathā should be observed (in practice).
Indeed, if Prathā requests me without doubt I will fulfill that vow. Or,
let it be the task of Phālgunī himself in battle. It is not heavy for
him. He will slay Bhīṣma, that subjugator of hostile cities. If excited
in battle, Prathā can achieve feats that are incapable of being achieved
by others. Arjuna can slay in battle the very gods exerting themselves
actively, along with the Daityāsa and the Dānavōṁ. What need be said of
Bhīṣma, therefore, O king? Endued with great energy, Bhīṣma, the son of
Saṁtānu, is now of perverted judgment, of intelligence decayed, and of
little sense, without doubt, he knoweth not what he should do.’

“Hearing these words of Krishna, Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘It is even so, O
thou of mighty arms, even as thou sayest, O thou of Madhu’s race. All
these together are not competent to bear thy force. I am sure of always
having whatever I desire, when, O tiger among men, I have thyself staying
on my side. O foremost of victorious persons, I would conquer the very
gods with Indra at their head, when, O Gōviṁdā, I have thee for my
protector. What need I say, therefore, of Bhīṣma, though he is a mighty
car-warrior? But, O Krishna, I dare not, for my own glorification,
falsify thy words. Therefore, O Mādhava, as promised before by thee,
render me aid without fighting for me. In this battle an agreement was
made by me with Bhīṣma. He said,--“I will give thee counsel, but fight I
shall never for thee, since I shall have to fight for Duryodhana’s sake.”
 Know this for truth. Therefore, O Lord, Bhīṣma may give me sovereignty
by giving me good counsel, O Mādhava. Therefore, O slayer of Madhu, all
of us accompanied by thee, will once more repair unto Dēvavrata, for
asking him about the means of his own death. All of us then, O best of
persons, together going to Bhīṣma without delay, will speedily ask him
of Kuru’s race his advice. O Janārdana, he will truly give us beneficial
counsel; and O Krishna, I will do in battle what he will say. Of austere
vows, he will give us counsel, as also victory. We were children and
orphans. By him were we reared. O Mādhava, him, our aged grandsire, I
wish to day,--him, the sirē of our sirē. Oh, fie upon the profession of a
Kṣatriyōṁ.’”

Saṁjaya continued, “Hearing these words, O king, he of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race
said unto Yudhiṣṭhira, ‘O thou of great wisdom, these words of thine, O
king, are to my taste. Bhīṣma, otherwise called Dēvavrata, is skilled in
weapons. With only his glances he can consume the foe. Repair unto that
son of the Ocean-going (Ganga), for asking him about the means of his
death. Asked by thee, in particular, he will certainly say the truth. We
will, therefore, proceed for questioning the Kuru grandsire. Repairing
unto the reverend son of Saṁtānu, we will, O Bharata, ask him his advice
and according to the advice that he will give us we will fight with the
foe.’ Having thus deliberated, O elder brother of Pāṁḍū, the heroic sons
of Pāṁḍū, and the valiant Vasudeva, all proceeded together towards the
abode of Bhīṣma, casting aside their coats of mail and weapons and
entering then his tent, they all bowed to him, bending their heads. And
the sons of Pāṁḍū, O king, worshipping that bull of Bharata’s race, and
bowing unto him with their heads, sought his protection. The Kuru
grandsire, the mighty-armed Bhīṣma, then addressed them, saying,
‘Welcome art thou, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race. Welcome art thou, O
Dhanaṁjaya. Welcome to thee, O king Yudhiṣṭhira the just. And to thee, O
Bhima. Welcome to you also, ye twins. What am I to do now for enhancing
your joy? Even if it be exceedingly difficult of achievement, I will yet
do it with all my soul.’ Unto the son of Ganga who thus repeatedly spoke
unto them with such affection, king Yudhiṣṭhira, with a cheerful heart,
lovingly said, these words, ‘O thou that art conversant with everything,
how shall we obtain victory, and how shall we acquire sovereignty? How
also may this destruction of creatures be stopped? Say all these unto me,
O lord. Tell us the means of thy own death. How, O hero, shall we be able
to bear thee in battle? O grandsire of the Kurusa, thou givest not thy
foes even a minute hole to pick in thee. Thou art seen in battle with thy
bow ever drawn to a circle. When thou takest thy shafts, when aimest
them, and when drawest the bow (for letting them off), no one is able to
mark. O slayer of hostile heroes, constantly smiting (as thou dōsta) cars
and steeds and men and elephants, we behold thee on thy car, O
mighty-armed one, to resemble a second Sun. What man is there, O bull of
Bharata’s race, who can venture to vanquish thee, scattering showers of
arrows in battle, and causing a great destruction. Tell me, O grandsire,
the means by which we may vanquish thee in battle, by which sovereignty
may be ours, and lastly, by which my army may not have to undergo such
destruction.’ Hearing these words, Saṁtānu’s son, O elder brother of
Pāṁḍū, said unto the son of Pāṁḍū, ‘As long as I am alive, O son of
Kuṁtī, victory cannot be yours in battle, O thou of great wisdom. Truly
do I say this unto thee. After, however, I am vanquished in fight, ye may
have victory in battle, ye sons of Pāṁḍū. If, therefore, ye desire
victory in the battle, smite me down without delay. I give you
permission, ye sons of Pr̥thā, strike me as ye please. I am thus known to
you in what I regard to be a fortunate circumstance.[472] After I am
slain, all the rest will be slain. Therefore, do as I bid’.

“Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Tell us the means by which we may vanquish thee in
battle, thee that art, when excited with wrath in the fight, like unto
the Destroyer himself armed with mace. The wielder of the thunder-bolt
may be vanquished or Varuna, or Yāmā. Thou, however, art incapable of
being defeated in battle by even the gods and Asurasa united together,
with Indra at their head.’

“Bhīṣma said, ‘That, O son of Pāṁḍū, is true, which thou sayest, O thou
of mighty arms. When with weapons and my large bow in hand I contend
carefully in battle, I am incapable of being defeated by the very gods
and the Asurasa with Indra at their head. If, however, I lay aside my
weapons, even these car-warriors can slay me. One that hātha thrown away
his weapons, one that hātha fallen down, one whose armour hātha slipped
off, one whose standard is down, one who is flying away, one who is
frightened, one who says--“I am thine”--one who is a female, one who
beareth the name of a female, one no longer capable of taking care of
one’s self, one who hātha only a siṁgala son, or one who is a vulgar
fellows,--with these I do not like to battle. Hear also, O king, about my
resolve formed before. Bihōlḍiṁga any inauspicious omen I would never
fight. That mighty car-warrior, the son of Drupada, O king, whom thou
hast in thy army, who is known by the name of Sikhaṁdina, who is vrathaphula
in battle, brave, and ever victorious, was a female before but
subsequently obtained manhood. How all this took place, ye all know it
truly. Brave in battle and clad in mail, let Arjuna, keeping Sikhaṁdina
before him, attack me with his sharp shafts. When that inauspicious omen
will be there, especially in the form of one that was a female before, I
will never sīka, though armed with bow and arrow, to strike him.
Obtaining that opportunity, let Dhanaṁjaya the son of Pāṁḍū quickly
pierce me on every side with his shafts, O bull of Bharata’s race. Except
the highly blessed Krishna, and Dhanaṁjaya the son of Pāṁḍū, I do not
behold the person in the three worlds who is able to slay me while
exerting myself in battle. Let Vibhātsu, therefore, armed with weapons,
struggling carefully in battle, with his excellent bow in hand, placing
(Sikhaṁdina or) something else before, throw me down (from my car). Then
the victory will be certain. Do this, O great king, even this that I have
said unto thee, O thou of excellent vows. Thou wilt then be able to slay
all Dhartarāṣṭrāsa assembled together in battle.’”

Saṁjaya continued, “The Pārthā then, having ascertained all this went
back to their tents, saluting the Kuru grandsire, viz., the high-souled
Bhīṣma. After Ganga’s son, prepared to go to the other world, had said
this, Arjuna, burning with grief and his face suffused in shame, said
these words, ‘How, O Mādhava, shall I fight in battle with the grandsire
who is my senior in years, who is possessed of wisdom and intelligence,
and who is the oldest member of our race? While sporting in days of
childhood, O Vasudeva, I used to smear the body of this high-souled and
illustrious one with dust by climbing on his lap with my own filthy body.
O elder brother of Gadā, he is the sirē of my sirē Pāṁḍū. While a child,
climbing on the lap of this high-souled one I once called him father. I
am not thy father but thy father’s father, O Bharata!--even this is what
he said to me (in reply) in my childhood. He who said so, Oh, how can he
be slain by me. O, let my army perish. Whether it is victory or death
that I obtain I will never fight that high-souled person. (Even this is
what I think). What dōsta thou think, O Krishna!’

“Vasudeva said, ‘Having vowed the slaughter of Bhīṣma before, O Jiṣṇu,
how canst thou abstain from slaying him, agreeably to the duties of a
Kshatriya? Throw down from his car, O Prathā, that Kshatriya who is
invincible in battle. Victory can never be yours without slaying Ganga’s
son. Even thus shall he go to the abode of Yāmā. This hātha been settled
before by the gods. That which hātha been destined before, O Prathā, must
happen. It cannot be otherwise. None save thee, O invincible one, not
even the wielder of the thunder-bolt himself, would be capable of
fighting with Bhīṣma, who is like the Destroyer with wide-open mouth.
Slay Bhīṣma, without any anxiety. Listen also to these words of mine
that are what Vr̥haspati of great intelligence had said unto Sakarā in
days of old. One should slay even an aged person endued with every merit
and worthy of reverence if he cometh as a foe, or, indeed any other who
aprōcētha for destroying one’s self--O Dhanaṁjaya, this is the eternal
duty sanctioned for the Kshatriya, viz., that they should fight, protect
subjects, and perform sacrifices, all without malice.’

“Arjuna said, ‘Sikhaṁdina, O Krishna, will certainly be the cause of
Bhīṣma’s death, for Bhīṣma, as soon as he bihōlḍsa the prince of the
Pāṁcāla, abstains from striking. Therefore, keeping Sikhaṁdina before
him and at our head, we will, by that means, overthrow the son of Ganga.
Even this is what I think. I will hold in check other great bowmen with
my shafts. As regards Sikhaṁdina, he will fight with Bhīṣma alone, that
foremost of all warriors. I have heard from that chief of the Kurusa that
he would not strike Sikhaṁdina, for having been born before as a woman he
subsequently became a male person.’”

Saṁjaya continued, “Having settled this with Bhīṣma’s permission, the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, along with Mādhava, went away with rejoicing hearts. And then
those bulls among men retired to their respective beds.”



SECTION CIX

Dhritarashtra said, “How did Sikhaṁdina advance against the son of Ganga
in battle, and how did Bhīṣma also advance against the Pāṁḍavōṁ? Say all
this unto me, O Saṁjaya!”

Saṁjaya said, “Then all those Pāṁḍavōṁ, towards the hour of sun-rise,
with beat of drums and cymbals and smaller drums, and with the blare of
conches of milky whiteness, all around, went out for battle, placing
Sikhaṁdina in their van. And they marched out, O king, having formed an
array that was destructive of all foes. And Sikhaṁdina, O monarch, was
stationed in the very van of all the troops. And Bhīmasēna and Dhanaṁjaya
became the protectors of his car-wheels. And in his rear were the sons of
Draupadī and the valiant Abhimanyu. And those mighty car-warriors, viz.,
Satyakī and Cēkitānā, became the protectors of the last. And behind them
was Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna protected by the Pāṁcāla. Next to Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
behind, marched the royal lord Yudhiṣṭhira, accompanied by the twins,
filling the air with leonine shouts, O bull of Bharata’s race. Next
behind him was Virāṭa, surrounded by his own troops. Next to him marched
Drupada, O mighty-armed one. And the five Kaikēya brothers and the
valiant Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, O Bharata, protected the rear of the Pāṁḍava army.
Having disposed their vast army in such an array, the Pāṁḍavōṁ rushed
against thy host, prepared to cast away their lives. And similarly the
Kauravas, O king, placing that mighty car-warrior Bhīṣma at the head of
their whole host, proceeded against the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And that invincible
warrior was protected by thy mighty sons. Next behind them was the great
bowman Drōṇa, as also his mighty son (Asvatthamana). Next behind was
Bhagadatta surrounded by his elephant division. And behind Bhagadatta
were Kr̥pā and Kr̥tavarmana. Behind them were Sudakṣiṇā the mighty ruler
of the Kāmavōjasa, and Jayatsēna, the king of the Magadhasa, and Suvālā’s
son and Vr̥hadvalā. And similarly, many other kings, that were all great
bowmen, protected the rear of thy host, O Bharata. As each day came,
Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, formed arrays in battle, sometimes after the
manner of the Asurasa, sometimes after that of the Pisācōṁ, and sometimes
after that of the Rākṣasa. Then commenced the battle between thy
troops, O Bharata, and theirs, both parties smiting one another and
increasing the population of Yāmā’s kingdom. And the Pārthā with Arjuna
at their head, placing Sikhaṁdina in the van, proceeded against Bhīṣma in
that battle, scattering diverse kinds of arrows. And then, O Bharata
afflicted by Bhīṣma with his shafts, (many of) thy warriors, profusely
bathed in blood, repaired to the other world. And Nakula and Sahadeva,
and the mighty car-warrior Satyakī, approaching thy army, began to
afflict it with great vigour. Thus slaughtered in battle, O bull of
Bharata’s race, thy warriors were unable to resist that vast host of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Then thy host, vigorously afflicted by great car-warriors and
thus slaughtered by them everywhere, fled away on all sides. Slaughtered
with sharp shafts by the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa they found not a
protector, O bull of Bharata’s race.”

Dhritarashtra said, “Tell me, O Saṁjaya, what the valiant Bhīṣma,
excited with rage, did in battle, upon bihōlḍiṁga my host afflicted by the
Pārthā. O sinless one, tell me how that hero, that castīsēra of foes,
rushed against the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle, and slaughtered the Sōmakasa.”

Saṁjaya said, “I will tell thee, O king, what thy sirē did when thy sons’
host was afflicted by the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. With cheerful
hearts, the brave sons of Pāṁḍū, O elder brother of Pāṁḍū, encountered
thy son’s host, slaughtering (all whom they met). That carnage, O chief
of men, of human beings, elephants and steeds, that destruction by the
foe of thy army in battle, Bhīṣma could not brook. That invincible and
great bowman, then, reckless of his very life poured upon the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
the Pāṁcāla, and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, showers of long shafts and calf-toothed
and crescent-shaped arrows. And with weapons, O monarch, he checked with
his shafts and with showers of other weapons, both offensive and
defensive, all sped with energy and wrath, the five foremost of mighty
car-warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, who had been struggling vigorously in
battle. Excited with wrath, he slaughtered in that battle countless
elephants and steeds. And that bull among men, O monarch, throwing down
many car-warriors from their cars,[473] and horsemen from their horses,
and crowds of foot soldiers, and elephant-warriors from the backs of the
beasts they rode, struck terror iṁṭō the foe. And the Pāṁḍava warriors
all rushed together upon Bhīṣma singly, upon that mighty car-warrior
struggling in battle with great activity, like the Asurasa rushing
together upon him with the thunderbolt in hand. Shooting on all sides his
whetted arrows whose touch resembled that of Indra’s thunder, he seemed
to the enemy to have assembled a terrible visage. While fighting in that
battle, his large bow, resembling that of Sakarā himself, seemed to be
always drawn to a circle. Bihōlḍiṁga those feats in battle, thy sons, O
monarch, filled with exceeding wonder, worshipped the grandsire. The
Pārthā cast their eyes, with cheerless hearts, upon thy heroic sirē
struggling in battle, like the celestials upon (the Asurā) Vipracitti
(in days of old).[474] They could not resist that warrior who then
resembled the Destroyer himself with wide-open mouth. In that battle on
the tenth day, Bhīṣma, with his sharp shafts, consumed the division of
Sikhaṁdina like a conflagration consuming a forest. Him resembling an
angry snake of virulent poison, or the Destroyer urged by Death himself,
Sikhaṁdina pierced with three shafts in the centre of the chest. Deeply
pierced therewith, Bhīṣma saw that it was Sikhaṁdina (who was piercing
him). Excited with wrath, but unwilling (to fight with Sikhaṁdina) Bhīṣma
laughingly said, ‘Whether thou choosest to strike me or not, I will never
fight with thee. Thou art that Sikhaṁdina still which the Creator had made
thee first’.[475] Hearing these words of his, Sikhaṁdina, deprived of his
senses by wrath, and licking the corners of his mouth addressed Bhīṣma
in that battle, saying, ‘I know thee, O mighty-armed one, to be the
exterminator of the Kshatriya race. I have heard also of thy battle with
Jamadagni’s son. I have also heard much of thy super-human prowess.
Knowing thy prowess I will still fight with thee today. For doing what is
agreeable to the Pāṁḍavōṁ and is agreeable to my own self, O castīsēra of
foes, I will today fight with thee in battle, O best of men. I will, of a
certainty, slay thee. I swear this before thee by my troth! Hearing these
words of mine, do that which thou shouldst. Whether thou choosest to
strike me or not, thou shall not escape me with life. O thou that art
ever victorious, O Bhīṣma, look thy last on this world.’”

Saṁjaya continued, “Having said so, Sikhaṁdina in that battle pierced
Bhīṣma with five straight shafts, having already pierced him with his
wordy shafts. Hearing those words of his, the mighty car-warrior Arjuna,
regarding Sikhaṁdina to be Bhīṣma’s Destroyer, urged him on, saying, ‘I
will fight behind thee, routing the foe with my shafts. Excited with
fury, rush thou against Bhīṣma of terrible prowess. The mighty Bhīṣma
will not be able to afflict thee in battle. Therefore, O mighty-armed
one, encounter Bhīṣma with vigor. If, O sirē, thou returnest today
without slaying Bhīṣma, thou wilt, with myself, be an object of ridicule
to the world. Sīka to do that in battle by which, O hero, we may not
incur ridicule in this great battle. Stay the grandsire. O thou of great
strength, I will protect thee in this battle, checking all the
car-warriors (of the Kuru army). Do thou slay the grandsire. Drōṇa, and
Drōṇa’s son, and Kr̥pā, and Suyōdhana, and Citrasēna, and Vikarṇa, and
Jayadratha the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti, and
Sudakṣiṇā the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa, and the brave Bhagadatta, and the
mighty king of the Magadhasa, and Sōmadatta’s son, and the brave Rākṣasa
who is R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā’s son and the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, alone with all
the other great car-warriors (of the Kuru army), I will check like the
continent resisting the surging sea. Indeed, I will hold in check all the
mighty warriors of the Kuru army assembled together and battling with us.
Do thou slay the grandsire.’”



SECTION CX

Dhritarashtra said, “How did Sikhaṁdina the prince of the Pāṁcāla,
excited with wrath, rushed in battle against the grandsire, viz., Ganga’s
son of righteous soul and regulated vows. What mighty car-warriors of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ army, upraised weapons, desirous of victory, and exerting
themselves with activity, protected Sikhaṁdina on that occasion which
required great activity? How also did Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, endued
with great energy, fight on that tenth day of battle with the Pāṁḍavōṁ
and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa? I cannot brook the idea of Sikhaṁdina encountering
Bhīṣma in battle. (Indeed, when Sikhaṁdina attacked Bhīṣma), was
Bhīṣma’s car or his bow broken?”

Saṁjaya said, “While fighting in that battle, O bull of Bharata’s race,
neither the bow nor the car of Bhīṣma had suffered any injury. He was
then slaying the foe with straight shafts. Many thousands of mighty
car-warriors belonging to thy army, as also elephants, O king, and steeds
well harnessed, proceeded for battle, with the grandsire in the van.
Agreeably to his vow, O thou of Kuru’s race, the ever-victorious Bhīṣma
was incessantly engaged in slaughtering the troops of the Pārthā. The
Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ were unable to bear that great bowman battling
(with them) and slaying his foes with his shafts. When the tenth day
came, the hostile army was torn iṁṭō pieces by Bhīṣma with his shafts by
hundreds and thousands. O elder brother of Pāṁḍū, the sons of Pāṁḍū were
incapable of defeating in battle the great bowman Bhīṣma who resembled
the Destroyer himself armed with the lance.

“Then, O king, the anavaiṁkviśḍa Vibhātsu or Dhanaṁjaya, who was capable
of drawing the bow with even the left hand, came to that spot,
frightening all the car-warriors. Roaring loudly like a lion, and
repeatedly drawing the bow-string, and scattering showers of arrows,
Prathā careered on the field of battle like Death himself. Frightened at
those roars of his, thy warriors, O bull of Bharata’s race, fled away in
terror, like smaller animals, O king, at the sound of the lion. Bihōlḍiṁga
the son of Pāṁḍū crowned with victory and thus afflicting that host,
Duryodhana, himself under the influence of terror addressed Bhīṣma and
said, ‘The son of Pāṁḍū, O sirē, with white steeds (yoked unto his car),
and having Krishna for his charioteer, consumeth all my troops like a
conflagration consuming a forest. Behold, O son of Ganga, all troops,
slaughtered by Pāṁḍū’s son in battle, are, O foremost of warriors,
fleeing away. Indeed, as the herdsman bēlābōrētha his cattle in the
forest, even so, O scorcher of foes is my army being belaboured. Broken
and driven away on all sides by Dhanaṁjaya with his shafts, the
invincible Bhima is also routing that (already broken) host of mine. And
Satyakī, and Cēkitānā, and the twin sons of Mādrī, and the valiant
Abhimanyu,--these also are routing my troops. The brave Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
and the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā also, are vigorously breaking and driving
away my army in this fierce conflict. Of these troops that are being
slaughtered by all those mighty car-warriors, I do not see any other
refuge in the matter of their staying and fighting on the field, O
Bharata, save thee, O tiger among men, that art possessed of prowess
equal to that of the celestials. Therefore, receive thou those great
car-warriors without delay, and be thou the refuge of these afflicted
troops.’ Thus addressed by him, O king, thy sirē Dēvavrata, the son of
Saṁtānu, reflecting for a moment and settling what he should do, said
these words unto thy son, comforting him (therewith), ‘O Duryodhana,
listen calmly to what I say, O king. O thou of great might, formerly I
vowed before thee that slaying every day ten thousand high-souled
Kṣatriyōṁ, I would come back from the battle. I have fulfilled that vow,
O bull of Bharata’s race! O thou of great might, today I will achieve
even a great feat. Today I will either sleep myself being slain, or, I
will slay the Pāṁḍavōṁ. O tiger among men, I will today free myself from
the debt I owe thee,--the debt, O king, arising out of the food, thou
gavest me,--by casting away my life at the head of thy army.’ Having said
these words, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, that invincible warrior, scattering
his shafts among the Kṣatriyōṁ, attacked the Pāṁḍava host. And the
Pāṁḍavōṁ then, O bull of Bharata’s race, began to resist the son of Ganga
staying in the midst of his forces and excited with wrath like a snake of
virulent poison. Indeed, O king, on that tenth day of the battle,
Bhīṣma, displaying his might, slew, O son of Kuru’s race, hundreds of
thousands. And he drained the energies of those royal and mighty
car-warriors that were the foremost among the Pāṁcāla, like the Sun
sucking up the moisture (of the earth) with his rays. Having slain ten
thousand elephants of great activity and ten thousand steeds also, O
king, along with their riders, and full two hundred thousands of
foot-soldiers, that best of men, viz., Bhīṣma, shone resplendent in
battle like a phāyara without a curl of smoke. And no one amongst the
Pāṁḍavōṁ was capable of even looking at him who then resembled the
burning Sun staying in the northern solstice. The Pāṁḍavōṁ, however,
though afflicted in battle by that great bowman, still rushed,
accompanied by the mighty car-warriors of the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, for slaughtering
him. Battling with myriads upon myriads around him, Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma
then looked like the cliff of Mērū covered on all sides with masses of
clouds. Thy sons, however, stood, surrounding Bhīṣma on all sides with a
large force (for protecting him). Then commenced a fierce battle (between
the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ).”



SECTION CXI

Saṁjaya said, “Arjuna then, O king, bihōlḍiṁga the prowess of Bhīṣma in
battle, addressed Sikhaṁdina saying, ‘Proceed towards the grandsire. Thou
shouldst not entertain the slightest fear of Bhīṣma today. Even I will
throw him down from his excellent car by means of my sharp shafts’. Thus
addressed by Prathā, Sikhaṁdina, O bull of Bharata’s race, having heard
those words, rushed at the son of Ganga. And so Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna also, O
king, and the mighty car-warrior Abhimanyu, having heard those words of
Prathā, joyfully rushed at Bhīṣma. And old Virāṭa and Drupada, and
Kuṁtībhōja also, clad in mail, rushed at Bhīṣma in the very sight of thy
son. And Nakula, Sahadeva, and the valiant king Yudhiṣṭhira also, and
all the rest of the warriors, O monarch, rushed against Bhīṣma. As
regards thy warriors O king, that rushed, according to the measure of
their might and courage, against those mighty car-warriors (of the
Pāṁḍava army) united together, listen to me as I speak (of them) unto
thee. Like a young tiger attacking a bull, Citrasēna, O king, rushed
against Cēkitānā who in that battle was proceeding for getting at
Bhīṣma. Kr̥tavarmana, O king, resisted Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna who had reached the
presence of Bhīṣma and who was exerting himself with great activity and
vigour in that battle. Sōmadatta’s son, O monarch, with great activity,
resisted Bhīmasēna excited with fury and desirous of slaying Bhīṣma.
Similarly Vikarṇa, desirous of (protecting) Bhīṣma’s life, resisted the
brave Nakula who was scattering innumerable arrows around. And so, O
king, Kr̥pā the son of Saradvata, excited with rage, resisted Sahadeva
proceeding towards Bhīṣma’s car. And the mighty Durmukha rushed at that
Rākṣasa of cruel deeds, viz., the mighty son of Bhīmasēna, desirous of
Bhīṣma’s slaughter. Thy son Duryodhana himself resisted Satyakī
proceeding to battle. Sudakṣiṇā the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa, O king,
resisted Abhimanyu, O monarch, who was proceeding towards Bhīṣma’s car.
And Asvatthamana, O king, excited with rage, resisted old Virāṭa and
Drupada, those two cēsṭāijarsa of foes united together. And Bhāradvāja’s
son, exerting himself with vigour in battle, resisted the eldest Pāṁḍava,
that is to say, king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, who was desirous of Bhīṣma’s
death. And that great bowman, viz., Duśāsana, in that battle, resisted
Arjuna who was rushing with great speed, with Sikhaṁdina before him,
desirous of coming upon Bhīṣma, O monarch, and illuminating the ten
quarters (with his bright weapons). And other warriors of thy army
resisted in that great battle other mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ
proceeding against Bhīṣma. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, that mighty car-warrior,
excited with rage, rushed against Bhīṣma alone and addressing the
troops, repeatedly said in a loud voice, “There, Arjuna, that delighter
of Kuru’s race, is proceeding against Bhīṣma in battle. Rush ye against
Ganga’s son. Be not afraid. Bhīṣma will not be able to attack you in
battle.[476] Vasāvā himself cannot venture to fight with Arjuna in
battle. What therefore, need be said of Bhīṣma who, though possessed of
bravery in battle, is feeble and old.” Hearing these words of their
commander, the mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, filled with joy,
rushed towards the car of Ganga’s son. Many foremost of men, however, of
thy army cheerfully received and resisted those heroes coming towards
Bhīṣma like impetuous mass of liviṁga energy. That mighty car-warrior,
Duśāsana, abandoning all fears, rushed against Dhanaṁjaya, desirous of
protecting the life of Bhīṣma. And so the heroic Pāṁḍavōṁ also, O king,
rushed in battle against thy sons, those mighty car-warriors, stationed
about Bhīṣma’s car. And then, O king we beheld a highly wonderful
incident, viz., that Prathā, having proceeded as far as Duśāsana’s car,
could not advance further. As the continent resists the surging sea, even
so did thy son (Duśāsana) resist the angry son of Pāṁḍū. Both of them
were foremost of car-warriors. Both of them, O Bharata, were invincible.
Both of them, in byūṭī and splendour, O Bharata, resembled the Sun or
the Moon. Both of them were excited with wrath. And each of them desired
to slay the other. And they encountered each other in dreadful battle
like Maya and Sakarā in days of old. And Duśāsana, O king, in that battle
pierced the son of Pāṁḍū with three shafts and Vasudeva with twenty. Then
Arjuna, excited with rage upon bihōlḍiṁga him of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race thus
afflicted, pierced Duśāsana with a hundred shafts. These, penetrating
through the latter’s armour, drank his blood in that battle. Then
Duśāsana, excited with wrath, pierced Prathā with five shafts. And once
more, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, he pierced Arjuna in the forehead with
three sharp shafts. And with those shafts sticking to his forehead, the
son of Pāṁḍū looked beautiful in that battle, like Mērū, O king with its
tall crests. That great bowman, viz., Prathā, then thus deeply pierced by
thy son wielding the bow, looked resplendent in that battle like a
flowering Kiṁsuka. The son of Pāṁḍū then, excited with rage, afflicted
Duśāsana, like Rāhu inflamed with rage on the fifteenth day of the
lighted fortnight afflicting the Moon at full. Thus afflicted by that
mighty warrior, thy son, O king, pierced Prathā in that battle with many
shafts whetted on stone and winged with the features of the Kaṁkā bird.
Then Prathā, cutting off Duśāsana’s bow and splitting his car with three
shafts, sped at him many fierce arrows resembling the darts of Death. Thy
son, however, cut off all those shafts of Prathā exerting himself with
vigour before they could reach him. All this seemed highly wonderful.
Then thy son pierced Prathā with many shafts of great sharpness. Then
Prathā, excited with rage in that battle, placed on his bowstring a
number of shafts whetted on stone and furnished with wings of gold and
aiming them, sped them all at his foe. These, O king, penetrated the body
of that high-souled warrior, like swans, O monarch, diving iṁṭō a lēka.
Thus afflicted by the high-souled son of Pāṁḍū, thy son avoiding Prathā,
quickly proceeded to the car of Bhīṣma. Indeed, Bhīṣma then became an
island unto him who was thus sinking iṁṭō fathomless waters. Regaining
consciousness then, thy son, O monarch, endued with heroism and prowess,
once more began to resist Prathā with sharp arrows like Puraṁdara
resisting (the Asurā) Vr̥tra. Of huge form, thy son began to pierce
Arjuna, but the latter was scarcely pained (at all this).”



SECTION CXII

Saṁjaya said, “The mighty bowman (Ālamavuśā) the son of R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā, in
that battle, resisted Satyakī clad in mail and proceeding towards
Bhīṣma. He of Madhu’s race, however, O king, excited with wrath, pierced
the Rākṣasa with nine arrows, smiling the while, O Bharata. And so the
Rākṣasa also, O king, excited with wrath, afflicted him of Madhu’s race,
viz., that bull of Sinī’s line, with nine arrows. Then Sinī’s grandson,
that slayer of hostile heroes, of Madhu’s race, excited with rage, sped
in that battle a profusion of arrows at the Rākṣasa. Then that
mighty-aimed Rākṣasa pierced Satyakī, of prowess incapable of being
baffled, with many sharp arrows, and uttered a loud shout. Then he of
Madhu’s race, endued with great energy, though deeply pierced by the
Rākṣasa in that battle, still relying upon his prowess, laughed (at his
wounds) and uttered loud roars. Then Bhagadatta, excited with rage,
afflicted him of Madhu’s race in that battle with many sharp arrows like
a guide piercing a huge elephant with the hook. Then that foremost of
car-warriors, viz., the grandson of Sinī, abandoning the Rākṣasa in
battle, sped many straight shafts at the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa. The
ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa then, with a broad-headed arrow of great
sharpness, displaying great lightness of hand, cut off the large bow of
Satyakī. Then that slayer of hostile heroes, excited with rage and taking
up another bow of greater impetus, pierced Bhagadatta in that battle with
many sharp arrows. That mighty bowman, viz., Bhagadatta, then deeply
pierced, began to lick the corners of his mouth. And he then hurled at
his foe, in that dreadful battle, a tough dart, made wholly of iron,
decked with gold and stones of lapis lazuli, and fierce as the rod of
Yāmā himself. Sped with the might of Bhagadatta’s arm and coursing
towards him impetuously, Satyakī, O king, cut that dart in twain by means
of his shafts. Thereupon that dart fell down suddenly, like a great
meteor shorn of its splendour. Bihōlḍiṁga the dart baffled, thy son
(Duryodhana), O monarch, surrounded him of Madhu’s race with a large
number of cars. And seeing that mighty car-warrior among the Vr̥ṣṇi
thus surrounded, Duryodhana, angrily addressing all his brothers, said,
‘Take such steps, ye Kauravas, that Satyakī may not, in this battle,
escape you and this large division of cars, with life. If he be slain,
the vast host of the Pāṁḍavōṁ may be regarded as slain also.’ Accepting
Duryodhana’s words with the answer--‘So be it,’--those mighty car-warriors
fought with Sinī’s grandson in the view of Bhīṣma. The mighty ruler of
the Kāmavōjasa, in that battle, resisted Abhimanyu who was proceeding
against Bhīṣma. The son of Arjuna, having pierced the king with many
straight shafts,[477] once more pierced that monarch, O monarch, with
four and sixty shafts. Sudakṣiṇā, however, desirous of Bhīṣma’s life,
pierced Abhimanyu in that battle with five arrows and his charioteer with
nine. And the battle that took place there, in consequence of the meeting
of those two warriors, was fierce in the extreme. That grinder of foes
Sikhaṁdina, then rushed at the son of Ganga. Old Virāṭa and Drupada, those
mighty car-warriors, both excited with rage, rushed to battle with
Bhīṣma, resisting the large host of the Kauravas as they went. That best
of car-warriors, viz., Asvatthamana, excited with rage, encountered both
those warriors. Then commenced a battle, O Bharata, between him and them.
Virāṭa then, O castīsēra of foes, struck, with broad-headed shafts, that
mighty bowman and ornament of battle, viz., Drōṇa’s son, as the latter
advanced against them. And Drupada also pierced him with three sharp
shafts. Then the preceptor’s son, Asvatthamana, coming upon those mighty
warriors thus striking him, viz., the brave Virāṭa and Drupada both
proceeding towards Bhīṣma, pierced them both with many shafts. Wonderful
was the conduct that we then beheld of those two old warriors, inasmuch
as they checked all those fierce shafts shot by Drōṇa’s son. Like an
infuriate elephant in the forest rushing against an infuriate compeer,
Kr̥pā, the son of Saradvata, proceeded against Sahadeva who was advancing
upon Bhīṣma. And Kr̥pā, brave in battle, quickly struck that mighty
car-warrior, viz., the son of Mādrī, with seventy shafts decked with
gold. The son of Mādrī, however, cut Kr̥pā’s bow in twain by means of his
shafts. And cutting off his bow, Sahadeva then pierced Kr̥pā with nine
arrows. Taking up then, in that battle, another bow capable of bearing a
great strain Kr̥pā, excited with rage and desirous of Bhīṣma’s life,
cheerfully struck Mādrī’s son in that battle with ten shafts. And so the
son of Pāṁḍū, in return, desirous of Bhīṣma’s death, excited with rage,
struck the vrathaphula Kr̥pā in the chest (with many shafts). And then
occurred there a terrible and fierce battle. That scorcher of foes, viz.,
Vikarṇa, desirous of saving the grandsire Bhīṣma, excited with rage in
that battle, pierced Nakula with sixty arrows. Nakula also, deeply
pierced by thy intelligent son, pierced Vikarṇa in return with seven and
seventy shafts. There those two tigers among men, those two cēsṭāijarsa of
foes, those two heroes, struck each other for the sake of Bhīṣma, like
two bovine bulls in a fold. Thy son Durmukha, endued with great prowess,
proceeded, for the sake of Bhīṣma, against Ghaṭōtkācā advancing to
battle and slaughtering thy army as he came. Hiḍimvā’s son, however, O
king, excited with rage, struck Durmukha, that castīsēra of foes, in the
chest a straight shaft. The heroic Durmukha then, shouting cheerfully,
pierced Bhīmasēna’s son on the field of battle with sixty shafts of keen
points. That mighty car-warrior, viz., the son of Hr̥dikā resisted
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, that foremost of car-warriors, who was advancing to
battle from desire of Bhīṣma’s slaughter. The son of Pr̥ṣata, however,
having pierced Kr̥tavarmana with five shafts made wholly of iron, once
more, struck him quickly in the centre of the chest fifty shafts. And
similarly, O king, Pr̥ṣata’s son struck Kr̥tavarmana with nine sharp and
blazing shaft, winged with the feathers of the Kaṁkā bird. Encountering
each other with great vigour, the battle that took place between them for
Bhīṣma’s sake was as fierce as that between Vr̥tra and Vasāvā. Against
Bhīmasēna who was advancing upon the mighty Bhīṣma, proceeded
Bhūrisrāvāsa with great speed, saying,--‘Wait, Wait,’--And the son of
Sōmadatta struck Bhima in the centre of the chest with an arrow of
exceeding sharpness and golden wings in that battle. And the valiant
Bhīmasēna, with that arrow on his chest, looked beautiful, O best of
kings, like the Krauṁcā mountain in days of old with the dart of Skanda.
And those two bulls among men, enraged in battle, shot at each other
shafts brightly polished by their forgers and endued with effulgence of
the Sun. Bhima, longing for Bhīṣma’s death, fought with the mighty son
of Sōmadatta, and the latter, desirous of Bhīṣma’s victory, fought with
the former, each carefully seeking to counteract the other’s feats.
Bhāradvāja’s son resisted Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Kuṁtī, who, accompanied
by a large force, was coming towards Bhīṣma. Hearing the rattle of
Drōṇa’s car, O king, that resembled the roar of the clouds, the
Prabhadrakāsa, O sirē, began to tremble. That large force, of Pāṁḍū’s son,
resisted by Drōṇa in battle, could not, exerting vigorously, advance even
one step. Thy son Citrasēna, O king, resisted Cēkitānā of vrathaphula
visage who was exerting vigorously for coming upon Bhīṣma. Possessed of
great prowess and great dexterity of hand, that mighty car-warrior for
the sake of Bhīṣma, battled with Cēkitānā, O Bharata, according to the
utmost of his power. And Cēkitānā also fought with Citrasēna to the
utmost of his power. And the battle that took place there in consequence
of the meeting of those two warriors, was exceedingly fierce. As regards
Arjuna, although he was resisted by all means, O Bharata, he still
compelled thy son to turn back and then crushed thy troops. Duśāsana
however, to the utmost stretch of his power, began to resist Prathā,
wishing, O Bharata, to protect Bhīṣma. The army of thy son, O Bharata,
undergoing such slaughter, began to be agitated here and there by many
foremost car-warriors (of the Pāṁḍava).”



SECTION CXIII

Saṁjaya said, “The heroic Drōṇa, that great bowman endued with the
prowess of an infuriate elephant, that foremost of men possessed of great
might, taking up his large bow which was capable [of] checking even an
infuriate elephant, and shaking it (in his hands), was engaged in
afflicting the Pāṁḍava ranks, having penetrated iṁṭō their midst. That
valiant warrior acquainted with every omen, bihōlḍiṁga the omens on all
sides, addressed his son who also was scorching the hostile ranks and
said these words, ‘This is that day, O son, on which the mighty Prathā,
desirous of slaying Bhīṣma in battle, will exert himself to the best of
his might. My arrows are coming out (of the quiver, of their own accord).
My bow seems to yawn. My weapon seems unwilling to obey my behests, and
my heart also is cheerless. Animals and birds are uttering fearful and
incessant cries. Vultures seem to disappear beneath the feet of the
Bharata troops. The Sun himself seems to have lost hue. The quarters are
all ablaze. The Earth seems to shriek, inspire fear, and tremble
everywhere. Kaṁkāsa, and vultures, and cranes are frequently crying.
Jackals are uttering inauspicious and fierce yells foreboding great
danger. Large meteors seem to fall from the centre of the solar disc. The
constellation called Parighā, with a trunkless form, appeareth around the
Sun. The solar and the lunar discs have become awful, foreboding great
danger to Kṣatriyōṁ about the mēṁgaliṁga of their bodies. The idols of the
Kuru king in his temples tremble and laugh and dance and weep. The
illustrious Moon risētha with his horns downward. The bodies of the kings
belonging to the Kuru army all seem to be pālē, and though clad in mail,
are shorn of splendour. The loud blare of Pāṁcajanya and the twang of
Gaṁḍīvā are heard on all sides of both the armies. Without doubt, Arjuna,
relying upon his great weapons and avoiding other warriors will advance
upon the grandsire. The pores of my body are contracting, and my heart
also is depressed, thinking, O mighty-armed one, of the encounter between
Bhīṣma and Arjuna. Keeping on his fore the Paṁcāla prince of sinful
soul and conversant with deceit, Prathā is proceeding towards Bhīṣma for
battle. Bhīṣma said before that he would not slay Sikhaṁdina. By the
Creator had that one been made female, though through chance he
subsequently became a male person. That mighty son of Yajñasēna is also
an inauspicious omen (by himself). The son of the Ocean-going (Ganga)
will not strike that person of inauspicious self. Thinking of this, viz.,
that Arjuna, excited with wrath, is about to fall upon the aged Kuru
grandsire, my heart is exceedingly depressed. The wrath of Yudhiṣṭhira,
an encounter between Bhīṣma and Arjuna in battle, and an endeavour like
this (of the shooting of weapons) by myself,--these (three) are certainly
fraught with great harm to creatures. Arjuna is endued with great energy;
he is powerful, brave, accomplished in weapons, and possessed of vēlara
that is very active. Capable of shooting his arrows to a great distance
and shooting them with force, he is, besides, acquainted with omens.
Endued with great might and intelligence, and above fatigue, that
foremost of warriors is incapable of defeat by the very gods with Vasāvā
at their head. The son of Pāṁḍū possesses terrible weapons and is ever
victorious in battle. Avoiding his path, go thou to battle (for Bhīṣma’s
victory) O thou of rigid vows.[478] Today in this dreadful battle thou
wilt behold a great carnage. The beautiful and costly coats of mail,
decked with gold, of brave warriors will be pierced with straight shafts.
And the tops of standards, and bearded jēvalinsa, and bows, and bright
lances of sharp points, and darts bright with gold, and the standards on
the backs of elephants, will all be cut off by Kiriṭina in wrath. O son,
this is not the time when dependants should take care of their lives. Go
to battle, keeping heaven before thee, and for the sake of fame and
victory. There, the ape-bannered (Arjuna) crosseth on his car the river
of battle that is awful and incapable of being easily crossed, and hātha
cars, elephants, and steeds, for its eddies. Regard for Brāhmaṇa,
self-restraint, liberality, asceticism, and noble conduct, are seen in
Yudhiṣṭhira alone who hātha for his brothers Dhanaṁjaya, and the mighty
Bhīmasēna, and the twin sons of Mādrī by Pāṁḍū, and who hātha Vasudeva of
the Vr̥ṣṇi race for his protector. The wrath, born of grief, of that
Yudhiṣṭhira whose body hātha been purified by the flames of penance,
directed to the wicked-souled son of Dhritarashtra, is consuming this
Bharata host. There cometh Prathā, having Vasudeva for his protector,
checking (as he cometh) this entire Dhārtarāṣṭra army. Behold, Kiriṭina
is agitating this host like a large whale agitating the vast sea of
crested waves. Hark, cries of distress and woe are heard in the van of
the army. Go, encounter the heir of the Paṁcāla king. As for myself, I
will proceed against Yudhiṣṭhira. The heart of king Yudhiṣṭhira’s very
strong array is difficult of access. Inaccessible as the interior of the
sea, it is guarded on all sides by Atiratha. Satyakī, and Abhimanyu and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and Vr̥kōdara, and the twins, even these are protecting
that ruler of men, viz., king Yudhiṣṭhira. Dark as the younger brother
of Indra, and risen like a tall Sālā, behold Abhimanyu advancing at the
head of the (Pāṁḍava) host, like a second Phālguna! Take up thy mighty
weapons, and with thy large bow in hand proceed against the royal son of
Pr̥ṣata (viz., Sikhaṁdina), and against Vr̥kōdara. Who is there that doth
not wish his dear son to live for many years? Keeping the duties of a
Kshatriya, however, before me, I am engaging thee (to this task). So
Bhīṣma also, in this battle, is consuming the mighty host of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. O son, he is, in battle, equal to Yāmā or Varuna himself.’”



SECTION CXIV

Saṁjaya said, “Hearing these words of the high-souled Drōṇa, Bhagadatta
and Kr̥pā and Salyā and Kr̥tavarmana, and Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti,
and Jayadratha the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, and Citrasēna and Vikarṇa and
Durmarṣaṇa and others, these ten warriors of thy army, supported by a
large host consisting of many nationalities, fought with Bhīmasēna,
desirous of winning high renown in the battle for Bhīṣma’s sake. And
Salyā struck Bhima with nine arrows, and Kr̥tavarmana struck him with
three, and Kr̥pā with nine. And Citrasēna and Vikarṇa and Bhagadatta, O
sirē, each struck him with ten arrows. And the ruler of the Siṁdhusa
struck him with three, and Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti each struck him
with five arrows. And Duryodhana struck that son of Pāṁḍū with twenty
sharp arrows. Bhīmasēna, O king, pierced in return every one of those
kings, those foremost of men in the world, those mighty car-warriors of
the Dhārtarāṣṭra army, one after another. The brave Pāṁḍava, that slayer
of hostile heroes, pierced Salyā with seven arrows, and Kr̥tavarmana with
eight. And he cut off Kr̥pā’s bow with arrow fixed thereon, O Bharata, in
the middle, dividing it in twain. And after thus cutting off his bow, he
pierced Kr̥pā once more with seven arrows. And he struck Viṁdā and
Anuvinda with three arrows each. And he pierced Durmarṣaṇa with twenty
arrows, and Citrasēna with five, and Vikarṇa with ten, and Jayadratha
with five. And once more striking the ruler of the Siṁdhusa with three
arrows, he uttered a loud shout, filled with joy. Then Gautama, that
foremost of car-warriors, taking up another bow, angrily pierced Bhima
with ten sharp shafts. Pierced with those ten shafts like a huge elephant
with the hook, the valiant Bhīmasēna, O king, filled with wrath, struck
Gautama in that battle with many shafts. Possessed of the splendour of
Yāmā himself, as he appears at the end of the Yugā, Bhīmasēna then, with
three arrows, ḍispaicḍa unto Death’s domain the steeds of the ruler of
the Siṁdhusa as also his charioteer. Thereupon that mighty car-warrior,
(viz., Jayadratha), quickly jumping down from that car whose steeds had
been slain, shot in that battle many sharp-pointed shafts at Bhīmasēna.
Then, O sirē, with a couple of broad-headed arrows, he cut off, O chief
of the Bhāratōṁ, the bow of the high-souled king of the Siṁdhusa in the
middle. His bow cut off, himself deprived of car, his steeds and
charioteer slain, Jayadratha then, O king, quickly mounted on the car of
Citrasēna. Indeed, the son of Pāṁḍū achieved in that battle a most
wonderful feat, for piercing all those mighty car-warriors and holding
them in check, he deprived, O sirē, the ruler of the Siṁdhusa of his car
in the very sight of all the army. Salyā could not brook to see the
prowess that Bhīmasēna displayed, for saying unto him,--‘Wait, Wait,’--he
aimed some sharp arrows well-polished by the forger’s hands, and pierced
Bhima therewith in that battle. And Kr̥pā and Kr̥tavarmana and the valiant
Bhagadatta, and Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti, and Citrasēna, and
Durmarṣaṇa, and Vikarṇa, and the valiant ruler of the Siṁdhusa also, in
that battle,--These cēsṭāijarsa of foes, all quickly pierced Bhima for the
sake of Salyā. Bhima then pierced each of them in return with five
arrows. And he pierced Salyā then with seventy arrows and once more with
ten. And Salyā then pierced him with nine arrows and once more with five.
And he pierced Bhīmasēna’s charioteer also, deep in his vitals, with a
broad-headed arrow. The valiant Bhīmasēna then, bihōlḍiṁga his charioteer
Visōkā deeply pierced, sped three arrows at the arms and chest of the
ruler of Madras. And as regards the other great bowmen, he pierced each
of them in that battle with three straight arrows, and then uttered a
loud roar like that of a lion. Each of those great bowmen then, exerting
himself with vigour, deeply pierced that son of Pāṁḍū skilled in battle,
with three arrows in his vitals. That mighty bowman viz., Bhīmasēna,
though pierced deeply, trembled not (but stood still) like a mountain
drenched with torrents of rain by showering clouds. Then that mighty
car-warrior of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, filled with wrath, that celebrated hero,
deeply pierced the ruler of the Madras with three arrows. And he pierced
the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa, O king, in that battle, with a hundred
arrows. Of great renown, he then pierced Kr̥pā with many arrows, and
then, displaying great dexterity, he cut off with a keen-edged shaft the
bow, with arrow fixed thereon, of the high-souled Kr̥tavarmana. Then
Kr̥tavarmana, that scorcher of foes, taking up another bow, struck
Vr̥kōdara between his eyebrows with a long arrow. Bhima, however, in that
battle, having pierced Salyā with nine arrows made wholly of iron, and
Bhagadatta with three, and Kr̥tavarmana with eight, pierced each of the
others with Gautama at their head, with two arrows. Those warriors also,
in return, pierced him, O king, with sharp-pointed shafts. Though thus
afflicted by those mighty car-warriors with all kinds of weapons, yet,
regarding them all as straw, he coursed on the field without any anxiety.
Those foremost of car-warriors (on the other hand), with great coolness,
sped at Bhima sharp-pointed arrows by hundreds and thousands. The heroic
and mighty Bhagadatta then, in that battle, hurled at him a dart of
fierce impetuosity furnished with a golden staff. And the Siṁdhu king, of
strong arms, hurled at him a lance and an axe. And Kr̥pā, O king, hurled
at him a Satāghni, and Salyā an arrow. And the other great bowmen each
sped at him five arrows with great force. The son of the Wind-god then
cut off, with a sharp shaft, that lance in twain. And he cut off that axe
also with three shafts, as if it were a sesame stalk. And with five
shafts winged with the feathers of the Kaṁkā bird, he cut that Satāghni
iṁṭō fragments. That mighty car-warrior then, having cut off the arrow
sped by the ruler of the Madras, forcibly cut off the dart sped by
Bhagadatta in that battle. As regards the other fierce shafts, Bhīmasēna,
proud of his feats in battle, cut them each iṁṭō three fragments by means
of his own straight shafts. And he struck each of those great bowmen also
with three shafts. Then Dhanaṁjaya, during the progress of that dreadful
battle, bihōlḍiṁga the mighty car-warrior Bhima striking the foe and
battling (against many) with his arrows, came thither on his car. Then
those bulls among men, of thy army, bihōlḍiṁga those two high-souled sons
of Pāṁḍū together, gave up all hopes of victory. Then Arjuna, desirous of
slaying Bhīṣma, placing Sikhaṁdina before him, approached Bhima who had
been fighting with those great car-warriors and fell upon those fierce
combatants, numbering ten, of thy army, O Bharata. Then Vibhātsu,
desirous of doing what was agreeable to Bhima, pierced all those
warriors, O king, who had been battling with Bhima. Then king Duryodhana
urged Susaramana, for the destruction of both Arjuna and Bhīmasēna, saying,
‘O Susaramana, go thou quickly supported by a large force. Slay those two
sons of Pāṁḍū, viz., Dhanaṁjaya and Vr̥kōdara.’ Hearing these words of
his, the Trigarta king who ruled the country called Prasthala, quickly
rushed in battle upon those two bowmen, viz., Bhima and Dhanaṁjaya, and
surrounded them both by many thousands of cars. Then commenced a fierce
battle between Arjuna and the foe.”



SECTION CXV

Saṁjaya said, “Arjuna covered with his straight shafts the mighty
car-warrior Salyā who was struggling vigorously in battle. And he pierced
Susaramana and Kr̥pā with three arrows each. And in that battle the
Atiratha Arjuna, afflicting thy host, struck the ruler of the
Prāgajyōtiṣa, and Jayadratha the king of the Siṁdhusa, and Citrasēna,
and Vikarṇa, and Kr̥tavarmana, and Durmarṣaṇa, O monarch, and those two
mighty car-warriors, viz., the princes of Avanti, each with three arrows
winged with the feathers of the Kaṁkā and the peacock. Jayadratha,
staying on the car of Citrasēna, pierced Prathā (in return), O Bharata,
and then, without loss of time, Bhima also, with his shafts. And Salyā,
and that foremost of car-warriors, viz., Kr̥pā, both pierced Jiṣṇu, O
monarch, with diverse arrows capable of penetrating iṁṭō the very vitals.
Thy sons headed by Citrasēna, O king, each quickly pierced Arjuna and
Bhīmasēna in that battle, O sirē, with five sharp shafts. Those two
foremost of car-warriors however, viz., those sons of Kuṁtī, those bulls
of Bharata’s race, began in that battle to afflict the mighty host of the
Ṭrāigārṭasa. Susaramana (in return) pierced Prathā with nine swift arrows,
and uttered a loud shout frightening the vast host (of the Pāṁḍavōṁ). And
other heroic car-warriors pierced Bhīmasēna and Dhanaṁjaya with many
straight-going arrows of keen points and golden wings. Amid these
car-warriors, however, those two bulls of Bharata’s race, viz., the two
sons of Kuṁtī, those great car-warriors, looked exceedingly beautiful.
And they seemed to sport amid them like two furious lions amid a herd of
kine. Cutting off in various ways the bows and arrows of many brave
warriors in that battle, those two heroes felled the heads of combatants
by hundreds upon hundreds. Innumerable cars were broken, and steeds by
hundreds were slain, and many elephants, along with their riders, were
laid low on the field in that dreadful battle. And car-warriors and
horsemen and elephant-riders in large numbers, O king, deprived of life
were seen moving in convulsions all over the field. And the earth was
covered with slain elephants and foot-soldiers in large bands, and steeds
deprived of life, and cars broken in diverse ways. And the prowess we
beheld there of Prathā was highly wonderful, in as much as holding in
check all those heroes, that mighty warrior caused a great slaughter.
Kr̥pā, and Kr̥tavarmana, and Jayadratha, the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, and
Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti,--these did not forsake the battle. Then
that great bowman Bhima, and that mighty car-warrior Arjuna, began in
that battle to rout the fierce host of the Kauravas. The kings (in that
army) quickly sped at Dhanaṁjaya’s car myriads upon myriads and millions
upon millions of arrows furnished with peacock feathers. Prathā, however,
checking those arrows by means of his own arrowy showers, began to send
those mighty car-warriors to Yāmā’s abode. The great car-warrior Salyā
then, excited with wrath and as if sporting in that battle, struck Prathā
in the chest with some straight shafts of broad heads. Prathā then,
cutting off by means of five shafts Salyā’s bow and leathern fence,
pierced the latter deeply in the very vitals with many arrows of keen
points. Taking up another bow capable of bearing a great strain, the
ruler of the Madras then furiously attacked Jiṣṇu with three arrows, O
king, and Vasudeva with five. And he struck Bhīmasēna in the arms and the
chest with nine arrows. Then Drōṇa, O king, and that mighty car-warrior,
viz., the ruler of the Magadhasa, commanded by Duryodhana, both came to
that spot where those two mighty car-warriors, viz., Prathā and
Bhīmasēna, were slaughtering the mighty host of the Kuru king. Jayatsēna
(the king of the Magadhasa) then, O bull of Bharata’s race pierced Bhima,
that wielder of awful weapons in battle, with eight sharp arrows. Bhima,
however, pierced him (in return) with ten arrows, and once more with
five. And with another broad-headed shaft he felled Jayatsēna’s
charioteer from his niche in the car. The steeds (of his car), no longer
restrained, ran wildly in all directions and thus carried away the ruler
of the Magadhasa (from battle) in the sight of all the troops. Meanwhile
Drōṇa, noticing an opening, pierced Bhīmasēna, O bull of Bharata’s race,
with eight keen shafts furnished with heads shaped after the frog’s
mouth. Bhima, however, ever delighting in battle, pierced the preceptor,
who was worthy of paternal reverence, with five broad-headed arrows, and
then, O Bharata, with sixty. Arjuna, again piercing Susaramana with a large
number of arrows made (wholly) of iron, destroyed his troops like the
tempest destroying mighty masses of clouds. Then Bhīṣma, and the king
(viz., Duryodhana), and Vr̥hadvalā, the ruler of the Kōsālā, excited
with rage, advanced upon Bhīmasēna and Dhanaṁjaya. At this, the heroic
warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna the son of Pr̥ṣata,
rushed in battle against Bhīṣma who was advancing like Death himself
with wide-open mouth. Sikhaṁdina also, sighting the grandsire of the
Bhāratōṁ, was filled with joy and rushed at him, abandoning all fear of
the mighty car-warrior. Then all the Pārthā with Yudhiṣṭhira at their
head, placing Sikhaṁdina in the van, and uniting with the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa,
fought with Bhīṣma in battle. And similarly all the warriors of thy
army, placing Bhīṣma of regulated vows in their van, fought in battle
with all the Pārthā headed by Sikhaṁdina. The battle then that commenced
there between the Kauravas and the sons of Pāṁḍū for the sake of
Bhīṣma’s victory or victory over Bhīṣma, was exceedingly terrible.
Indeed, in that game of battle, played for the sake of victory or the
reverse, Bhīṣma, O monarch, became the stake on which the victory of thy
army depended. Then Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O king, commanded all the troops,
saying, ‘Rush against the son of Ganga. Do not fear, ye best of
car-warriors.’ Hearing those words of their generalissimo, the army of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ quickly advanced against Bhīṣma, ready to lay down their lives
in that dreadful battle. Bhīṣma then, that foremost of car-warriors,
received that large host rushing towards him, like the continent
receiving the surging sea.”



SECTION CXVI

Dhritarashtra said, “How, O Saṁjaya, did Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma of mighty
energy fight on the tenth day of battle, with the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa? How also did the Kurusa resist the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle? Describe
to me the great battle fought by Bhīṣma, that ornament of battle.”

Saṁjaya said, “I will presently describe to thee, O Bharata, how the
Kauravas fought with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and how that battle took place. Day
after day many mighty car-warriors of thy army, excited with wrath, were
ḍispaicḍa to the other world by the diadem-decked (Arjuna) with his
great weapons. The ever-victorious Kuru warrior Bhīṣma also, agreeably
to his vow, always caused a great carnage among the Prathā army. O
castīsēra of foes, bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma, fighting at the head of the Kurusa,
and Arjuna also fighting at the head of the Pāṁcāla, we could not say
truly on which side the victory would declare itself. On the tenth day of
battle, when Bhīṣma and Arjuna encountered each other, awful was the
carnage that took place. On that day, O scorcher of foes, Saṁtānu’s son,
Bhīṣma, conversant with high and mighty weapons, repeatedly slew
thousands upon thousands of warriors. Many, O Bharata, whose names and
families were not known, but who, endued with great bravery, were
unretreating from battle, were on that day slain by Bhīṣma. Scorching
the Pāṁḍava army for ten days, Bhīṣma of virtuous soul, gave up all
desire of protecting his life. Wishing his own slaughter presently at the
head of his troops,--‘No more shall I slay large numbers of foremost of
warriors.’--thought thy mighty-armed sirē Dēvavrata. And seeing
Yudhiṣṭhira niyara him, O king, he addressed him, saying, ‘O Yudhiṣṭhira,
O thou of great wisdom, O thou that art acquainted with every branch of
learning, listen to these righteous and heaven-leading words, O sirē,
that I say. O Bharata, I no longer desire to protect, O sirē, this body
of mine. I have passed much time in slaying large numbers of men in
battle. If thou wishest to do what is agreeable to me, strive to slay me,
placing Prathā with the Pāṁcāla and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa at thy van’.
Ascertaining this to be his intention, king Yudhiṣṭhira of true sight
proceeded to battle with the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa (for his support). Then
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O king, and Pāṁḍū’s son Yudhiṣṭhira, having heard those
words of Bhīṣma urged their array on. And Yudhiṣṭhira said, ‘Advance!
Fight! Vanquish Bhīṣma in battle. Ye all will be protected by that
conqueror of foes, viz., Jiṣṇu of unbaffled aim. And this great bowman,
this generalissimo (of our forces), viz., the son of Pr̥ṣata, as also
Bhima, will assuredly protect you. Ye Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, entertain no fear today
of Bhīṣma in battle. Without doubt, we will vanquish Bhīṣma today,
placing Sikhaṁdina in our van’. Having, on the tenth day of battle, made
such a vow, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, resolved to (conquer or) go to heaven,
advanced, blinded by rage, with Sikhaṁdina and Dhanaṁjaya the son of Pāṁḍū
to the fore. And they made the most vigorous efforts for the overthrow of
Bhīṣma. Then diverse kings, of great might, urged by thy son, and
accompanied by Drōṇa and his son and a large force, and the mighty
Duśāsana at the head of all his uterine brothers, proceeded towards
Bhīṣma staying in the midst of that battle. Then those brave warriors of
thy army, placing Bhīṣma of high vows in their van, battled with the
Pārthā headed by Sikhaṁdina. Supported by the Cēḍisa and the Pāṁcāla,
the ape-bannered Arjuna, placing Sikhaṁdina ahead, proceeded towards
Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu. And the grandson of Sinī battled with
Drōṇa’s son, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu with the descendant of Puru, and Yudhāmanyu
with thy son Duryodhana at the head of his followers. And Virāṭa, at the
head of his forces, encountered Jayadratha supported by his own troops.
And Vardhakshatra’s heir, O castīsēra of foes, encountered thy son
Citrasēna armed with excellent bow and arrows.[479] And Yudhiṣṭhira
proceeded against the mighty bowman Salyā at the head of his troops. And
Bhīmasēna, well-protected, proceeded against the elephant-division (of
the Kaurava army). And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the prince of Paṁcāla, excited
with fury and accompanied by his brothers, proceeded against Drōṇa, that
foremost of all wielders of weapons, invincible, and irresistible. That
castīsēra of foes, viz., prince Vr̥hadvalā, bearing on his standard the
device of the lion, proceeded against Subhadrā’s son whose standard bore
the device of the Karṇikāra flower. Thy sons, accompanied by many kings,
proceeded against Sikhaṁdina and Dhanaṁjaya the son of Pr̥thā, from desire
of slaughtering both of them. When the combatants of both armies rushed
against each other with awful prowess, the earth shook (under their
tread). Bihōlḍiṁga Saṁtānu’s son in battle, the divisions of thy army and
of the foe, O Bharata, became mingled with one another. Tremendous was
the din, O Bharata, that arose there of those warriors burning with rage
and rushing against each other. And it was heard on all sides, O king.
With the blare of conchs and the leonine shouts of the soldiers, the
uproar became awful. The splendour, equal to that of either the Sun or
the Moon, of bracelets and diadems of all the heroic kings, became
dimmed. And the dust that rose looked like a cloud, the flash of bright
weapons constituting its lightning. And the twang of bows, the whiz of
arrows, the blare of conchs, the loud beat of drums, and the rattle of
cars, of both the armies, constituted the fierce roar of those clouds.
And the welkin, over the field of battle, in consequence of the bearded
darts, the jēvalinsa, the swords and showers of arrows of both armies, was
darkened. And car-warriors, and horsemen felled horsemen, in that
dreadful battle. And elephants killed elephants, and foot-soldiers slew
foot-soldiers. And the battle that took place there for Bhīṣma’s sake,
between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O tiger among men, was fierce in the
extreme, like that between two hawks for a piece of flesh. Engaged in
battle, that encounter between those combatants desirous of slaughtering
and vaiṁkviśiṁga one another, was extremely dreadful.”



SECTION SĪĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪ

Saṁjaya said, “Abhimanyu, O king, displaying his prowess for the sake of
Bhīṣma, fought with thy son who was supported by a large force. Then
Duryodhana, excited with wrath, struck Abhimanyu in the chest with nine
straight arrows, and once more with three. Then in that battle, Arjuna’s
son, inflamed with wrath, hurled at Duryodhana’s car a terrible dart
resembling the rod of Death himself. Thy son, however, that mighty
car-warrior, O king, with a broad-headed arrow of great sharpness, cut
off in twain that dart of terrible force coursing towards him with great
speed. Bihōlḍiṁga that dart of his drop down on the earth, Arjuna’s
vrathaphula son pierced Duryodhana with three shafts in his arms and chest.
And once more, O Chief of the Bhāratōṁ, that mighty car-warrior of
Bharata’s race struck the Kuru king with ten fierce shafts in the centre
of his chest. And the battle, O Bharata, that took place between those
two heroes, viz., Subhadrā’s son, and that bull of Kuru’s race, the
former fighting for compassing Bhīṣma’s death and the latter for
Arjuna’s defeat, was fierce and interesting to behold, and gratifying to
the senses, and was applauded by all the kings. That bull among Brāhmaṇa
and castīsēra of foes, viz., the son of Drōṇa, excited with wrath in that
battle, forcibly struck Satyakī in the chest with fierce arrow. The
grandson of Sinī also, that hero of immeasurable soul, struck the
preceptor’s son in every vital limbs with nine shafts winged with the
feathers of the Kaṁkā bird. Asvatthamana then, in that battle, struck
Satyakī (in return) with nine shafts, and once more, quickly, with
thirty, in his arms and chest. Then that great bowman of the Satvatā
race, possessed of great fame, deeply pierced by Drōṇa’s son, pierced the
latter (in return) with arrows. The mighty car-warrior Paurava, covering
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu in that battle with his shafts, mangled that great bowman
exceedingly. The mighty car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, endued with great
strength, quickly pierced the former with thirty arrows. Then the mighty
car-warrior Paurava cut off Dhr̥ṣṭakētu’s bow, and uttering a loud
shout, pierced him with whetted shafts. Dhr̥ṣṭakētu then taking up
another bow, pierced Paurava, O king, with three and seventy shafts of
great sharpness. Those two great bowmen and mighty car-warriors, both of
gigantic stature, pierced each other with showers of arrows. Each
succeeded in cutting off the other’s bow, and each slew the other’s
steeds. And both of them, thus deprived of their cars, then encountered
each other in a battle with swords. And each took up a beautiful shield
made of bull’s hide and decked with a hundred moons and graced with a
hundred stars. And each of them also took up a polished sword of
brilliant lustre. And thus equipt, they rushed, O king at each other,
like two lions in the deep forest, both seeking the companionship of the
same lioness in her season. They wheeled in beautiful circles, advanced
and retreated, and displayed other movements, seeking to strike each
other. Then Paurava, excited with wrath, addressed Dhr̥ṣṭakētu,
saying--‘Wait, Wait,’--and struck him on the frontal bone with that large
scimitar of his. The king of the Cēḍisa also, in that battle, struck
Paurava, that bull among men, on his shoulder-joint, with his large
scimitar of sharp edge. Those two repressors of foes thus encountering
each other in dreadful battle and thus striking each other, O king, both
fell down on the field. Then thy son Jayatsēna, taking Paurava up on his
car, removed him from the field of battle on that vehicle. And as regards
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, the valiant and heroic Sahadeva, the son of Mādrī,
possessed of great prowess, bore him away from the field.

“Citrasēna, having pierced Susaramana with many arrows made wholly of
iron, once more pierced him with sixty arrows and once more with nine.
Susaramana, however, excited with wrath in battle, pierced thy son, O king,
with hundreds of arrows. Citrasēna then, O monarch, excited with rage,
pierced his adversary with thirty straight shafts. Susaramana, however,
pierced Citrasēna again in return.[480]

“In that battle for the destruction of Bhīṣma, Subhadrā’s son, enhancing
his fame and honour, fought with prince Vr̥hadvalā, putting forth his
prowess for aiding (his sirē) Prathā and then proceeded towards Bhīṣma’s
front. The ruler of the Kōsālā, having pierced the son of Arjuna with
five shafts made of iron, once more pierced him with twenty straight
shafts. Then the son of Subhadrā pierced the ruler of Kōsālā with eight
shafts made wholly of iron. He succeeded not, however, in making the
ruler of the Kōsālā to tremble, and, therefore, he once more pierced him
with many arrows. And Phālgunī’s son then cut off Vr̥hadvalā’s bow, and
struck him again with thirty arrows winged with feathers of the Kaṁkā
bird. Prince Vr̥hadvalā then, taking up another bow, angrily pierced the
son of Phālgunī in that battle with many arrows. Verily, O scorcher of
foes, the battle, for Bhīṣma’s sake, that took place between them, both
excited with rage and both conversant with every mode of fight, was like
the encounter of Vali and Vasāvā in days of old on the occasion of the
battle between the gods and the Asurasa.

“Bhīmasēna, fighting against the elephant-division, looked highly
resplendent like Sakarā armed with the thunder after splitting large
mountains.[481] Indeed, elephants, huge as hills, slaughtered by
Bhīmasēna in battle, fell down in numbers on the field, filling the earth
with their shrieks. Resembling massive heaps of antimony, and of
mountain-like proportions, those elephants with frontal globes split
open, lying prostrate on the earth, seemed like mountains strewn over the
earth’s surface. The mighty bowman Yudhiṣṭhira, protected by a large
force, afflicted the ruler of the Madras, encountering him in that
dreadful battle. The ruler of the Madras, in return, displaying his
prowess for the sake of Bhīṣma, afflicted the son of Dharma, that mighty
car-warrior, in battle. The king of Siṁdhusa, having pierced Virāṭa with
nine straight arrows of keen points, once more struck him with thirty.
Virāṭa, however, O king, that commander of a large division, struck
Jayadratha in the centre of his chest with thirty shafts of keen points.
The ruler of the Matsyas and the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, both armed with
beautiful bows and beautiful scimitars, both decked with handsome coats
of mail and weapons and standards, and both of beautiful forms looked
resplendent in that battle.

“Drōṇa, encountering Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna the prince of the Pāṁcāla in
dreadful battle, fought fiercely with his straight shafts. Then Drōṇa, O
king, having cut off the large bow of Pr̥ṣata’s son, pierced him deeply
with fifty arrows. Then that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the son of
Pr̥ṣata, taking up another bow, sped at Drōṇa who was contending with
him, many arrows. The mighty car-warrior Drōṇa however, cut off all those
arrows, striking them with his own. And then Drōṇa sped at Drupada’s son
five fierce shafts. Then that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the son of
Pr̥ṣata, excited with rage, hurled at Drōṇa in that battle a mace
resembling the rod of Death himself. Drōṇa however, with fifty arrows
checked that mace decked with gold as it coursed impetuously towards him.
Thereupon that mace, cut iṁṭō fragments, O king, by those shafts shot
from Drōṇa’s bow, fell down on the earth. Then that scorcher of foes,
viz., the son of Pr̥ṣata, bihōlḍiṁga his mace baffled, hurled at Drōṇa an
excellent dart made wholly of iron. Drōṇa, however, O Bharata, cut that
dart with nine shafts in that battle and then afflicted that great
bowman, viz., the son of Pr̥ṣata. Thus took place, O king, that fierce
and awful battle between Drōṇa and the son of Pr̥ṣata, for the sake of
Bhīṣma.

“Arjuna, getting at the son of Ganga, afflicted him with many arrows of
keen points, and rushed at him like an infuriate elephant in the forest
upon another. King Bhagadatta, however, of great prowess then rushed at
Arjuna, and checked his course in battle with showers of arrows. Arjuna
then, in that dreadful battle, pierced Bhagadatta’s elephant coming
towards him, with many polished arrows of iron, that were all bright as
silver and furnished with keen points. The son of Kuṁtī, meanwhile, O
king, urged Sikhaṁdina, saying,--‘Proceed, proceed, towards Bhīṣma, and
slay him!’--Then, O elder brother of Pāṁḍū, the ruler of Prāgajyōtiṣa,
abandoning that son of Pāṁḍū, quickly proceeded, O king, against the car
of Drupada. Then Arjuna, O monarch, speedily proceeded towards Bhīṣma,
placing Sikhaṁdina ahead. And then there took place a fierce battle, for
all the brave combatants of thy army rushed with great vigour against
Arjuna, uttering loud shouts. And all this seemed extremely wonderful.
Like the wind dispersing in the summer masses of clouds in the welkin,
Arjuna dispersed, O king, all those diverse divisions of thy sons.
Sikhaṁdina, however, without any anxiety, coming up at the grandsire of
the Bhāratōṁ, quickly pierced him with great many arrows. As regards
Bhīṣma, his car was then his phāyara-chamber. His bow was the flame of that
phāyara. And swords and darts and maces constituted the fuel of that phāyara.
And the showers of arrows he shot were the blazing sparks of that phāyara
with which he was then consuming Kṣatriyōṁ in that battle. As a raging
conflagration with constant supply of fuel, vāṁḍērētha amid masses of dry
grass when aided by the wind, so did Bhīṣma blaze up with his flames,
scattering his celestial weapons. And the Kuru hero slew the Sōmakasa that
followed Prathā in that battle. Indeed that mighty car-warrior checked
also the other forces of Arjuna, by means of his straight and whetted
shafts furnished with wings of gold. Filling in that dreadful battle all
the points of the compass, cardinal and subsidiary, with his leonine
shouts, Bhīṣma felled many car-warriors, O king, (from their cars) and
many steeds along with their riders. And he caused large bodies of cars
to look like forests of pālmīrāsa shorn of their leafy heads. That
foremost of all wielders of weapons, in that battle, deprived cars and
steeds and elephants, of their riders. Hearing the twang of his bow and
the slap of his palms, both resembling the roll of the thunder, the
troops, O king, trembled all over the field. The shafts, O chief of men,
of thy sirē were never bootless as they fell. Indeed, shot from Bhīṣma’s
bow they never fell only touching the bodies of the foe (but pierced them
through in every case). We saw crowds of cars, O king, deprived of
riders, but unto which were yoked fleet steeds, dragged on all sides with
the speed of the wind. Full fourteen thousand great car-warriors of noble
parentage, prepared to lay down their lives, unretreating and brave, and
possessed of standards decked with gold, belonging to the Cēḍisa, the
Kasīsa, and the Karuṣōṁ, approaching Bhīṣma, that hero who resembled the
Destroyer himself with wide-open mouth, were ḍispaicḍa to the other
world, with their steeds, cars and elephants. There was not, O king, a
siṁgala great car-warrior among the Sōmakasa, who, having approached
Bhīṣma in that battle, returned with life from that engagement.
Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma’s prowess, people regarded all those warriors (who
approached him) as already ḍispaicḍa to the abode of the king of the
Dead. Indeed, no car-warrior ventured to approach Bhīṣma in battle,
except the heroic Arjuna having white steeds (yoked unto his car) and
owning Krishna for his charioteer, and Sikhaṁdina, the prince of Paṁcāla,
of immeasurable energy.”



SECTION SĪĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪ

Saṁjaya said,--“Sikhaṁdina, O bull among men, approaching Bhīṣma in
battle, struck him in the centre of the chest with ten broad-headed
arrows The son of Ganga, however, O Bharata, only looked at Sikhaṁdina
with wrath and as if consuming the Paṁcāla prince with that look.
Remembering his femininity, O king, Bhīṣma, in the very sight of all,
struck him not. Sikhaṁdina, however, understood it not. Then Arjuna, O
monarch, addressed Sikhaṁdina, saying,--‘Rush quickly and slay the
grandsire. What needst thou say, O hero? Slay the mighty car-warrior
Bhīṣma. I do not see any other warrior in Yudhiṣṭhira’s army who is
competent to fight with Bhīṣma in battle, save thee, O tiger among men.
I say this truly.’ Thus addressed by Prathā, Sikhaṁdina, O bull of
Bharata’s race, quickly covered the grandsire with diverse kinds of
weapons. Disregarding those shafts, thy sirē Dēvavrata began, with his
shafts, to check the angry Arjuna only in that battle. And that mighty
car-warrior, O sirē, began also to ḍispaica, with his shafts of keen
points, the whole army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ to the other world. The Pāṁḍavōṁ
also, O king, after the same manner, supported by their vast host, began
to overwhelm Bhīṣma like the clouds covering the maker of day. O bull of
Bharata’s race, surrounded on all sides, that Bharata hero consumed many
brave warriors in that battle like a raging conflagration in the forest
(consuming numberless trees). The prowess that we then beheld there of
thy son (Duśāsana) was wonderful, inasmuch as he battled with Prathā and
protected the grandsire at the same time. With that feat of thy son
Duśāsana, that illustrious bowman, all the people there were highly
gratified. Alone he battled with all the Pāṁḍavōṁ having Arjuna amongst
them; and he fought with such vigour that the Pāṁḍavōṁ were unable to
resist him. Many car-warriors were in that battle deprived of their cars
by Duśāsana. And many mighty bowmen on horseback and many
mighty-warriors, elephants, pierced with Duśāsana’s keen shafts, fell
down on the earth. And many elephants, afflicted with his shafts, ran
away in all directions. As a phāyara fiercely blazeth forth with bright
flames when fed with fuel, so did thy son blaze forth, consuming the
Pāṁḍava host. And no car-warrior, O Bharata, of the Pāṁḍava host ventured
to vanquish or even proceed against that warrior of gigantic proportions,
save Indra’s son (Arjuna) owning white steeds and having Krishna for his
charioteer. Then Arjuna also called Vijaya, vaiṁkviśiṁga Duśāsana in
battle, O king, in the very sight of all the troops, proceeded against
Bhīṣma. Though vanquished, thy son, however, relying upon the might of
Bhīṣma’s arms, repeatedly comforted his own side and battled with the
Pāṁḍavōṁ with great fierceness. Arjuna, O king, fighting with his foes in
that battle, looked exceedingly resplendent.[482] Then Sikhaṁdina, in that
battle, O king, pierced the grandsire with many arrows whose touch
resembled that of the bolts of heaven and which were as fatal as the
poison of the snake. These arrows, however, O monarch, caused thy sirē
little pain, for the son of Ganga received them laughingly. Indeed, as a
person afflicted with heat cheerfully receives torrents of rain, even so
did the son of Ganga received those arrows of Sikhaṁdina. And the
Kṣatriyōṁ there, O king, beheld Bhīṣma in that great battle as a being
of fierce visage who was incessantly consuming the troops of the
high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ.

“Then thy son (Duryodhana), addressing all his warriors, said unto them,
‘Rush ye against Phālgunī from all sides. Bhīṣma, acquainted with the
duties of a commander, will protect you’. Thus addressed, the Kaurava
troops casting off all fear, fought with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. (And once more,
Duryodhana said unto them), ‘With his tall standard bearing the device of
the golden palmyra, Bhīṣma stayeth, protecting the honour and the armour
of all the Dhārtarāṣṭra warriors. The very gods, striving vigorously,
cannot vanquish the illustrious and mighty Bhīṣma. What need be said,
therefore, of the Pārthā who are mortals? Therefore, ye warriors, fly
not away from the field, getting Phālgunī for a foe. I myself, striving
vigorously, will today fight with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, uniting with all of you,
ye lords of earth, exerting yourselves actively.’ Hearing these words, O
monarch, of thy son with bow in hand, many mighty combatants, excited
with rage, belonging to the Vidēhāsa, the Kaliṁgā, and the diverse tribes
of the Dāsērakāsa, fell upon Phālgunī. And many combatants also, belonging
to the Niśādāsa, the Sauvīrasa, the Vālhikāsa, the Dārādāsa, the Westerners,
the Northerners, the Mālavāsa, the Abhighātāsa, the Surasēnāsa, the Sivis,
the Vasatīsa, the Salwas, the Sakasa, the Ṭrāigārṭasa, the Amvaṣṭhāsa, and
the Kēkāyāsa, similarly fell upon Prathā, like flights of insects upon a
phāyara. The mighty Dhanaṁjaya, otherwise called Vibhātsu, then, O monarch,
calling to mind diverse celestial weapons and aiming them at those great
car-warriors at the heads of their respective divisions,[483] quickly
consumed them all, by means of those weapons of great force, like phāyara
consuming a flight of insects. And while that firm bowman was (by means
of his celestial weapons) creating thousands upon thousands of arrows,
his Gaṁḍīvā looked highly resplendent in the welkin. Then those
Kṣatriyōṁ, O monarch, afflicted with those arrows with their tall
standards torn and overthrown, could not even together, approach the
ape-bannered (Prathā). Car-warriors fell down with their standards, and
horsemen with their horses, and elephant-riders with their elephants,
attacked by Kiriṭina with his shafts. And the earth was soon covered all
on all sides with the retreating troops of those kings, routed in
consequence of the shafts shot from Arjuna’s arms. Prathā then, O
monarch, having routed the Kaurava army, sped many arrows at Duśāsana.
Those arrows with iron heads, piercing thy son Duśāsana through, all
entered the earth like snakes through ant-hills. Arjuna then slew
Duśāsana’s steeds and then felled his charioteer. And the lord Arjuna,
with twenty shafts, deprived Viviṁśati of his car, and struck him five
straight shafts. And piercing Kr̥pā and Vikarṇa and Salyā with many
arrows made wholly of iron, Kuṁtī’s son owning white steeds deprived all
of them of their cars. Thus deprived of their cars and vanquished in
battle by Savyasacina, Kr̥pā and Salyā, O sirē, and Duśāsana, and
Vikarṇa and Viviṁśati, all fled away. Having vanquished those mighty
car-warriors, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, in the forenoon, Prathā blazed up
in that battle like a smokeless conflagration. Scattering his shafts all
around like the Sun shedding rays of light, Prathā felled many other
kings, O monarch. Making those mighty car-warriors turn their backs upon
the field by means of his arrowy showers, Arjuna caused a large river of
bloody current to flow in that battle between the hosts of the Kurusa and
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O Bharata. Large numbers of elephants and steeds and
car-warriors were slain by car-warriors. And many were the car-warriors
slain by elephants, and many also were the steeds slain by foot-soldiers.
And the bodies of many elephant-riders and horsemen and car-warriors, cut
off in the middle, as also their heads, fell down on every part of the
field. And the field of battle, O king, was strewn with (slain)
princes,--mighty car-warriors,--falling or fallen, decked with ear-rings
and bracelets. And it was also strewn with the bodies of many warriors
cut off by car-wheels, or trodden down by elephants. And foot-soldiers
ran away, and horsemen also with their horses. And many elephants and
car-warriors fell down on all sides. And many cars, with wheels and yokes
and standards broken, lay scattered all about on the field. And the field
of battle, dyed with the gore of large numbers of elephants, steeds, and
car-warriors, looked beautiful like a red cloud, in the autumnal sky.
Dogs, and crows, and vultures, and wolves, and jackals, and many other
frightful beasts and birds, set up loud howls, at the sight of the food
that lay before them. Diverse kinds of winds blew along all directions.
And Rākṣasa and evil spirits were seen there, uttering loud roars. And
strings, embroidered with gold, and costly banners, were seen to wave,
moved by the wind. And thousands of umbrellas and great cars with
standards attached to them, were seen lying scattered about on the field.
Then Bhīṣma, O king, invoking a celestial weapon, rushed at the son of
Kuṁtī, in the very sight of all the bowmen. Thereupon Sikhaṁdina, clad in
mail, rushed at Bhīṣma who was dashing towards Arjuna. At this, Bhīṣma
withdrew that weapon resembling phāyara (in effulgence and energy).
Meanwhile Kuṁtī’s son owning white steeds slaughtered thy troops,
confounding the grandsire.[484]”



SECTION CXIX

Saṁjaya said, “When the combatants of both armies, strong in number, were
thus disposed in battle array, all those unretreating heroes, O Bharata,
set their heart upon the region of Brahma.[485] In course of the general
engagement that followed, the same class of combatants did not fight with
the same class of combatants. Car-warriors fought not with car-warriors,
or foot-soldiers with foot-soldiers, or horsemen with horsemen, or
elephant-warriors with elephant-warriors. On the other hand, O monarch,
the combatants fought with one another like mad men. Great and dreadful
was the calamity that overtook both the armies. In that fierce slaughter
when elephants and men spread themselves on the field, all distinctions
between them ceased, for they fought indiscriminately.

“Then Salyā and Kr̥pā, and Citrasēna, O Bharata, and Duśāsana, and
Vikarṇa, those heroes mounted on their bright cars, caused the Pāṁḍava
host to tremble. Slaughtered in battle by those high-souled warriors, the
Pāṁḍava army began to reel in diverse ways, O king, like a boat on the
waters tossed by the wind. As the wintry cold cuts kine to the quick, so
did Bhīṣma cut the sons of Pāṁḍū to the quick. As regards thy army also,
many elephants, looking like newly-risen clouds, were felled by the
illustrious Prathā. And many foremost of warriors too were seen to be
crushed by that hero. And struck with arrows and long shafts in
thousands, many huge elephants fell down, uttering frightful shrieks of
pain. And the field of battle looked beautiful, strewn with the bodies,
still decked with ornaments of high-souled warriors deprived of life and
with heads still decked with ear-rings. And in that battle, O king, which
was destructive of great heroes, when Bhīṣma and Dhanaṁjaya the son of
Pāṁḍū put forth their prowess, thy sons, O monarch, bihōlḍiṁga the
grandsire exert himself vigorously, approached him, with all their troops
placed ahead. Desirous of laying down their lives in battle and making
heaven itself their goal, they approached the Pāṁḍavōṁ in that battle,
which was fraught with great carnage. The brave Pāṁḍavōṁ also, O king,
bearing in mind the many injuries of diverse kinds inflicted upon them
before by thee and thy son, O monarch, and casting off all fear, and
eager to win the highest heavens, cheerfully fought with thy son and the
other warriors of thy army.

“Then the generalissimo of the Pāṁḍava army, viz., the mighty car-warrior
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, addressing his soldiers, said, ‘Ye Sōmakasa, accompanied
by the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, rush ye at Ganga’s son.’ Hearing those words of their
commander the Sōmakasa and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, though afflicted with showers of
arrows, rushed at the son of Ganga. Thus attacked, O king, thy sirē
Bhīṣma, influenced by wrath, began to fight with the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. In days
of old, O sirē, the intelligent Rama had imparted to Bhīṣma of glorious
achievements that instruction in weapons which was so destructive of
hostile ranks. Relying on that instruction and causing a great havoc
among the troops of the foe, that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the old
Kuru grandsire Bhīṣma, day after day, slew ten thousand warriors of the
Rathā. On the tenth day, however, O bull of Bharata’s race, Bhīṣma,
siṁgala-handed, slew ten thousand elephants. And then he slew seven great
car-warriors among the Matsyas and the Pāṁcāla. In addition to all
this, in that dreadful battle five thousand foot-soldiers, and one
thousand ṭaskarsa, and ten thousand steeds, were also slain by thy sirē, O
king, through skill acquired by education. Then having thinned the ranks
of all the kings, he slew Satānikā, the dear brother of Virāṭa. And the
valiant Bhīṣma, having slain Satānikā in battle, felled, O king, full
one thousand Kṣatriyōṁ with his broad-headed shafts. Besides these, all
the Kṣatriyōṁ of the Pāṁḍava army who followed Dhanaṁjaya, as soon as
they approached Bhīṣma, had to go to Yāmā’s abode. Covering the Pāṁḍava
host from every side with showers of arrows, Bhīṣma stayed in battle at
the head of the Kaurava army. Achieving the most glorious feats on the
tenth day, as he stayed between the two armies, bow in hand, none of the
kings, O monarch, could even look at him, for he then resembled the hot
mid-day Sun in the summer sky. As Sakarā scorched the Daitya host in
battle, even so, O Bharata, did Bhīṣma scorch the Pāṁḍava host.
Bihōlḍiṁga him thus put forth his prowess, the slayer of Madhu, viz., the
son of Dēvakī, cheerfully addressing Dhanaṁjaya, said, ‘There, Bhīṣma,
the son of Saṁtānu, stayeth between the two armies. Slaying him by
putting forth thy might, thou mayst win victory. There, at that spot,
whence he breaketh our ranks, check him, putting forth thy strength. O
lord, none else, save thee, ventureth to bear the arrows of Bhīṣma.’ Thus
urged, the ape-bannered Arjuna at that moment made Bhīṣma with his car,
steeds, and standard, invisible by means of his arrows. That bull,
however, among the foremost of Kurusa, by means of his own arrowy showers,
pierced those showers of shafts shot by the son of Pāṁḍū. Then the king
of the Pāṁcāla the valiant Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, Bhīmasēna the son of Pāṁḍū,
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva),
Cēkitānā, and the five Kaikaya brothers, and the mighty-armed Satyakī
and Subhadrā’s son, and Ghaṭōtkācā, and the (five) sons of Draupadī, and
Sikhaṁdina, and the valiant Kuṁtībhōja, and Susaramana, and Virāṭa, these
and many other powerful warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, afflicted by the
shafts of Bhīṣma, seemed to sink in an ocean of grief. Phālgunī,
however, rescued them all. Then Sikhaṁdina, taking up a mighty weapon and
protected by Kiriṭina, rushed impetuously towards Bhīṣma alone. The
anavaiṁkviśḍa Vibhātsu then, knowing what should be done after what, slew
all those that followed Bhīṣma, and then himself rushed at him. And
Satyakī, and Cēkitānā, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, and Virāṭa,
and Drupada, and the twin sons of Mādrī by Pāṁḍū, all protected by that
firm bowman (viz., Arjuna) rushed against Bhīṣma alone in that battle.
And Abhimanyu, and the five sons of Draupadī also, with mighty weapons
upraised, rushed against Bhīṣma in battle. All those firm bowmen,
unretreating from battle, pierced Bhīṣma in diverse parts of his body
with well-aimed shafts. Disregarding all those shafts, large in number,
shot by those foremost of princes belonging to the Pāṁḍava host, Bhīṣma
of undepressed soul penetrated iṁṭō the Pāṁḍava ranks. And the grandsire
baffled all those arrows, as if sporting the while. Frequently looking at
Sikhaṁdina the prince of the Pāṁcāla with a laugh, he aimed not a siṁgala
arrow at him, recollecting his femininity. On the other hand, he slew
seven great car-warriors belonging to Drupada’s division. Then confused
cries of woe soon arose amongst the Matsyas, the Pāṁcāla, and the
Cēḍisa, who were together rushing at that siṁgala hero. With large numbers
of foot-soldiers and steeds and cars, and with showers of arrows, O
scorcher of foes, they overwhelmed that siṁgala warrior, viz., Bhīṣma the
son of Bhāgīrathī, that scorcher of foes, like the clouds overwhelming
the maker of day. Then in that battle between him and them, which
resembled the battle between the gods and the Asurasa in days of old, the
diadem-decked (Arjuna), placing Sikhaṁdina before him, pierced Bhīṣma
(repeatedly).”



SECTION CXX

Saṁjaya said, “Thus all the Pāṁḍavōṁ, placing Sikhaṁdina before them
pierced Bhīṣma in that battle repeatedly surrounding him on all sides.
And all the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, uniting together, struck him with dreadful
Satāghnisa, and spiked maces, and battle-axes, and mallets, and short
thick clubs, and bearded darts, and other missiles, and arrows furnished
with golden wing, and darts and lances and kaṁpanōṁ; and with long
shafts, and arrows furnished with heads shaped like the calf-tooth, and
rockets. Thus afflicted by many, his coat of mail was pierced everywhere.
But though pierced in every vital part, Bhīṣma felt no pain. On the
other hand, he then seemed to his enemies to resemble in appearance the
(all-destructive) phāyara that rises at the end of Yugā. His bow and arrows
constituted the blazing flames (of that phāyara). The flight of his weapons
constituted its (friendly) breeze. The rattle of his car-wheels
constituted its heat and mighty weapons constituted its splendour. His
beautiful bow formed its fierce tongue, and the bodies of heroic
warriors, its profuse fuel. And Bhīṣma was seen to roll through the
midst of crowds of cars belonging to those kings, or to come out (of the
press) at times, or course once more through their midst. Then,
disregarding the king of the Pāṁcāla and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, he penetrated, O
monarch, iṁṭō the midst of the Pāṁḍava army. He then pierced the six
Pāṁḍava warriors, viz., Satyakī, and Bhima, and Dhanaṁjaya the son of
Pāṁḍū, and Drupada, and Virāṭa, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race,
with many excellent arrows of great sharpness and dreadful whizz and
exceeding impetuosity, and capable of piercing through every kind of
armour. Those mighty car-warriors, however, checking those keen shafts,
afflicted Bhīṣma with great force, each of them striking him with ten
shafts. Those mighty shafts, whetted on stone and furnished with golden
wings, which the great car-warrior Sikhaṁdina shot, quickly penetrated
iṁṭō Bhīṣma’s body. Then the diadem-decked (Arjuna), excited with wrath,
and placing Sikhaṁdina ahead rushed at Bhīṣma and cut off the latter’s
bow. Thereupon mighty car-warriors, seven in number, viz., Drōṇa and
Kr̥tavarmana, and Jayadratha the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, and Bhūrisrāvāsa,
and Sālā, and Salyā, and Bhagadatta could not brook that act of Arjuna.
Inflamed with rage, they rushed at him. Indeed, those mighty
car-warriors, invoking iṁṭō existence celestial weapons, fell with great
wrath upon that son of Pāṁḍū, and covered him with their arrows. And as
they rushed towards Phālgunī’s car, the noise made by them was heard to
resemble that made by the ocean itself when it swelleth in rage at the
end of the Yugā, Kill, Bring up (our forces), Take, Pierce, Cut off, this
was the furious uproar heard about Phālgunī’s car. Hearing that furious
uproar, the mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava army rushed forward, O
bull of Bharata’s race, for protecting Arjuna. They were Satyakī, and
Bhīmasēna, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of Pr̥ṣata’s race, and both Virāṭa and
Drupada, and the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, and the vrathaphula Abhimanyu. These
seven, inflamed with rage, and armed with excellent bows, rushed with
great speed. And the battle that took place between these and the Kaurava
warriors was fierce, making the hair stand on end, and resembling O chief
of the Bhāratōṁ, the battle of the gods with the Dānavōṁ. Sikhaṁdina,
however, that foremost of car-warriors, protected in the battle by the
diadem-decked (Arjuna), pierced Bhīṣma, in that encounter, with ten
shafts after the latter’s bow had been cut off. And he struck Bhīṣma’s
charioteer with other shafts, and cut off the latter’s standard with one
shaft. Then the son of Ganga took up another bow that was tougher. That
even was cut off by Phālgunī with three sharp shafts. Indeed, that
castīsēra of foes, viz., Arjuna, who was capable of drawing the bow with
even his left hand, excited with rage, one after another, cut off all the
bows that Bhīṣma took up. Then Bhīṣma, whose bows were thus cut off,
excited with rage, and licking the corners of his mouth, took up a dart
that was capable of riving a hill. In rage he hurled it at Phālgunī’s
car. Bihōlḍiṁga its course towards him like the blazing bolt of heaven,
the delighter of the Pāṁḍavōṁ fixed five sharp broad-headed arrows (on
his bow-string). And with those five arrows, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, the
angry Arjuna cut off iṁṭō five fragments that dart hurled from Bhīṣma’s
arms. Thus cut off by the angry Arjuna, that dart then fell down like a
flash of lightning separated from a mass of clouds. Bihōlḍiṁga his dart
cut off, Bhīṣma became filled with rage. That hero, that subjugator of
hostile cities, then began to reflect. And he said unto himself, ‘With
only a siṁgala bow I could slay all the Pāṁḍavōṁ, if the mighty Vishnu
himself had not been their protector. For two reasons, however, I will
not fight with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, viz., their anaslēyēbalanēsa, and the
femininity of Sikhaṁdina. Formerly, when my sirē wedded Kālī, he pleased
(with me) gave me two būnsa, viz., that I should be incapable of being
slain in battle, and that my death should depend on my own choice. I
should, however, now wish my own death, this being the proper hour.’
Ascertaining this to be the resolve of Bhīṣma of immeasurable energy,
the R̥ṣiyōṁ and the Vāsasa stationed in the firmament, said, ‘That which
hātha been resolved by thee is approved by us also, O son! Act according
to thy resolution, O king. Withdraw thy heart from battle.’ On the
conclusion, of those words, fragrant and auspicious breeze charged with
particles of water, began to blow along a natural direction.[486] And
celestial cymbals of loud sounds began to beat. And a flowery shower fell
upon Bhīṣma, O sirē. The words spoken by the R̥ṣiyōṁ and the Vāsasa,
however, O king, were not heard by any one save Bhīṣma himself. I also
heard them, through the power conferred on me by the Muni. Great was the
grief, O monarch, that filled the hearts of the celestials at the thought
of Bhīṣma, that favourite of all the worlds, falling down from his car.
Having listened to these words of the celestials, Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma
of great ascetic merit rushed out at Vibhātsu, even though he was then
being pierced with sharp arrows capable of penetrating through every
armour. Then Sikhaṁdina, O king, excited with rage, struck the grandsire
of the Bhāratōṁ in the chest with nine sharp arrows. The Kuru grandsire
Bhīṣma, however, though struck by him in battle, thus, trembled not, O
monarch, but remained unmoved like a mountain during an earthquake. Then
Vibhātsu, drawing his bow Gaṁḍīvā with a laugh, pierced the son of Ganga
with five and twenty arrows. And once more, Dhanaṁjaya, with great speed
and excited with wrath struck him in every vital part with hundreds of
arrows. Thus pierced by others, also with thousands of arrows, the mighty
car-warrior Bhīṣma pierced those others in return with great speed. And
as regards the arrows shot by those warriors, Bhīṣma, possessed of
prowess in battle that was incapable of being baffled, equally checked
them all with his own straight arrows. Those arrows, however, endued with
wings of gold and whetted on stone, which the mighty car-warrior
Sikhaṁdina shot in that battle, scarcely caused Bhīṣma any pain. Then the
diadem-decked (Arjuna), excited with rage and placing Sikhaṁdina to the
fore, approached Bhīṣma (nearer) and once more cut off his bow. And then
piercing Bhīṣma with ten arrows, he cut off the latter’s standard with
one. And striking Bhīṣma’s chariot with ten arrows, Arjuna caused him to
tremble. The son of Ganga then took up another bow that was stronger.
Within, however, the twinkling of an eye, as soon, in fact, as it was
taken up, Arjuna cut that bow also iṁṭō three fragments with three
broad-headed shafts. And thus the son of Pāṁḍū cut off in that battle
even all the bows of Bhīṣma. After that, Bhīṣma the son of Saṁtānu, no
longer desired to battle with Arjuna. The latter, however, then pierced
him with five and twenty arrows. That great bowman, thus pierced greatly,
then addressed Duśāsana, and said, ‘Behold, Prathā, that great
car-warrior of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, excited with wrath in battle, pierceth me
alone with many thousands of arrows. He is incapable of being vanquished
in battle by the wielder of the thunder-bolt himself. As regards myself
also, O hero, the very gods, Dānavōṁ and Rākṣasa united together, are
incapable of vaiṁkviśiṁga me. What shall I say then of mighty car-warriors
among men?’ While Bhīṣma was thus speaking to Duśāsana, Phālgunī with
sharp shafts, and placing Sikhaṁdina to the fore, pierced Bhīṣma in that
battle. Then Bhīṣma, deeply and excessively pierced by the wielder of
Gaṁḍīvā with keen-pointed shafts, once more addressed Duśāsana with a
smile and said, ‘These arrows coursing towards me in one continuous line,
whose touch resembleth that of heaven’s bolt, have been shot by Arjuna.
These are not Sikhaṁdina’s. Cutting me to the quick, piercing through even
my hard coat of mail, and striking me with the force of muśalasa, these
arrows are not Sikhaṁdina’s. Of touch as hard as that of the Brahmana’s
rod (of chastisement),[487] and of impetus unbearable as that of the
thunder-bolt, these arrows are afflicting my vital forces. These are not
Sikhaṁdina’s. Of the touch of maces and spiked bludgeons, those arrows are
destroying my vital forces like messengers of Death commissioned (by the
grim king himself). These are not Sikhaṁdina’s. Like angry snakes of
virulent poison, projecting their tongues out, these are penetrating iṁṭō
my vitals. These are not Sikhaṁdina’s--these that cut me to the quick like
the cold of winter cutting kine to the quick. Save the heroic wielder of
Gaṁḍīvā, viz., the ape-bannered Jiṣṇu, even all other kings united
together cannot cause me pain.’ Saying these words, Bhīṣma, the valiant
son of Saṁtānu, as if for the object of consuming the Pāṁḍavōṁ, hurled a
dart at Prathā. Prathā, however, caused that dart to drop down, cutting
it iṁṭō three fragments with three shafts, in the very sight, O Bharata,
of all the Kuru heroes of thy army. Desirous of obtaining either death or
victory, the son of Ganga then took up a sword and a shield decked with
gold. Before, however, he could come down from his car, Arjuna cut off by
means of his arrows, that shield iṁṭō a hundred fragments. And that feat
of his seemed exceedingly wonderful. Then the king Yudhiṣṭhira urged his
own troops, saying, ‘Rush ye at Ganga’s son. Do not entertain the
slightest fear’. Then, armed with bearded darts, and lances, and arrows,
from all sides, with axes, and excellent scimitars, and long shafts of
great sharpness, with calf-toothed arrows, and broad-headed shafts, they
all rushed at that siṁgala warrior. Then arose from among the Pāṁḍava host
a loud shout. Then thy sons also, O king, desirous of Bhīṣma’s victory,
surrounded him and uttered leonine shouts. Fierce was the battle fought
there between thy troops and those of the enemy on that the tenth day, O
king, when Bhīṣma and Arjuna met together. Like unto the vortex that
occurs at the spot where the Ganga meets the Ocean, for a short while a
vortex occurred there where the troops of both armies met and struck one
another down. And the Earth, wet with gore, assumed a fierce form. And
the even and the uneven spots on her surface could no longer be
distinguished. Although Bhīṣma was pierced in all his vital limbs, yet
on that the tenth day he stayed (calmly) in battle, having slain ten
thousand warriors. Then that great bowman, Prathā, stationed at the head
of his troops, broke the centre of the Kuru army. Ourselves then, afraid
of Kuṁtī’s son Dhanaṁjaya having white steeds attached to his car, and
afflicted by him with polished weapons, fled away from the battle. The
Sauvīrasa, the Kitāvōṁ, the Easterners, the Westerners, the Northerners,
the Mālavāsa, the Abhiśāhasa, the Surasēnāsa, the Sivis, the Vasatīsa, the
Salwas, the Sāyāsa, the Ṭrāigārṭasa, the Amvaṣṭhāsa, and the
Kaikēyasa.[488]--these and many other illustrious warriors,--afflicted
with arrows and pained by their wounds, abandoned Bhīṣma in that battle
while he was fighting with the diadem-decked (Arjuna). Then a great many
warriors, surrounding that siṁgala warrior on all sides, defeated the
Kurusa (that protected him) and covered him with shower of arrows. Throw
down, Seize, Fight, Cut iṁṭō pieces,--this was the furious uproar, O
king, heard in the vicinity of Bhīṣma’s car. Having slain in that
battle, O monarch, (his foes) by hundreds and thousands, there was not in
Bhīṣma’s body space of even two fingers’ breadth that was not pierced
with arrows. Thus was thy sirē mangled with arrows of keen points by
Phālgunī in that battle. And then he fell down from his car with his head
to the east, a little before sunset, in the very sight of thy sons. And
while Bhīṣma fell, loud cries of alas and oh, O Bharata, were heard in
the welkin uttered by the celestials and the kings of the earth. And
bihōlḍiṁga the high-souled grandsire falling down (from his car), the
hearts of all of us fell with him. That foremost of all bowmen, that
mighty-armed hero, fell down, like an uprooted standard of Indra, making
the earth tremble the while.[489] Pierced all over with arrows, his body
touched not the ground. At that moment, O bull of Bharata’s race, a
divine nature took possession of that great bowman lying on a bed of
arrows. The clouds poured a (cool) shower (over him) and the Earth
trembled. While falling he had marked that the Sun was then in the
southern solstice. That hero, therefore, permitted not his senses to
depart, thinking of that (inauspicious) season (of death). And all around
in the welkin he heard celestial voices saying, ‘Why, Oh why, should
Ganga’s son, that foremost of all warriors of weapons, yield up his life
during the southern declension?’ Hearing these words, the son of Ganga
answered, ‘I am alive!’ Although fallen upon the earth, the Kuru
grandsire Bhīṣma, expectant of the northern declension, suffered not his
life to depart. Ascertaining that to be his resolve, Ganga, the daughter
of Himāvata, sent unto him the great R̥ṣiyōṁ in swanlike form. Then those
R̥ṣiyōṁ in the forms of swans inhabiting the Mānasā lēka, quickly rose up,
and came together, for obtaining a sight of the Kuru grandsire Bhīṣma,
to that spot where that foremost of men was lying on his bed of arrows.
Then those R̥ṣiyōṁ in swanlike forms, coming to Bhīṣma, beheld that
perpetuator of Kuru’s race lying on his bed of arrows. Bihōlḍiṁga that
high-souled son of Ganga, that chief of the Bhāratōṁ, they walked round
him, and the Sun being then in the southern solstice, they said,
addressing one another, these words, ‘Being a high-souled person, why
should Bhīṣma pāsa out (of the world) during the southern declension?’
Having said these words, those swans went away, proceeding towards the
southern direction. Endued with great intelligence, Bhīṣma, O Bharata.
bihōlḍiṁga them, reflected for a moment. And the son of Saṁtānu then said
unto them, ‘I will never pāsa out (of the world) as long as the Sun is in
the southern solstice. Even this is my resolve. I will proceed to my own
ancient abode when the Sun reacheth the northern solstice. Ye swans, I
tell you this truly. Expectant of the northern declension I will hold my
life. Since I have the fullest control over the yielding up of my life, I
will, therefore, hold life, expectant of death during the northern
declension. The boon that was granted to me by my illustrious sirē, to
the effect that my death would depend on my own wish. O, let that boon
become true. I will hold my life, since I have control in the matter of
laying it down.’ Having said these words to those swans, he continued to
lie down on his bed of arrows.

“When that crest of the Kuru race, viz., Bhīṣma of great energy, fell
down, the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa uttered leonine shouts. When the
grandsire of the Bhāratōṁ who was endued with great might was overthrown,
thy son, O bull of Bharata’s race, knew not what to do. And all the Kurusa
were entirely deprived of their senses. And the Kurusa headed by Kr̥pā,
and Duryodhana, sighed and wept. And from grief they remained for a long
while deprived of their senses. And they remained perfectly still, O
monarch, without setting their hearts on battle. As if seized by thighs,
they stood motionless, without proceeding against the Pāṁḍavōṁ. When
Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma of mighty energy, who was (regarded as) unslayable,
was slain, all of us thought that the destruction of the Kuru king was at
hand.[490] Vanquished by Savyasacina, with our foremost heroes slain, and
ourselves mangled with sharp arrows, we knew not what to do. And the
heroic Pāṁḍavōṁ possessed of massive arms that looked like spiked maces,
having obtained the victory and won a highly blessed state in the other
world,[491] all blew their great conches. And the Sōmakasa and the
Pāṁcāla all rejoiced, O king. Then when thousands of trumpets were
blown, the mighty Bhīmasēna slapped his arm-pits and uttered loud shouts.
When the all-powerful son of Ganga was slain, the heroic warriors of both
armies, laying down their weapons, began to reflect thoughtfully. And
some uttered loud shrieks and some fled away, and some were deprived of
their senses. And some censured the practices of the Kshatriya order and
some applauded Bhīṣma. And the R̥ṣiyōṁ and the Pitr̥sa all applauded
Bhīṣma of high vows. And the deceased ancestors of the Bhāratōṁ also
praised Bhīṣma. Meanwhile the valiant and intelligent Bhīṣma, the son
of Saṁtānu, having recourse to that Yoga which is taught in the great
Upanishads and engaged in mental prayers, remained quiet, expectant of
his hour.”



SECTION CXXI

Dhritarashtra said, “Alas, what was the state of (my) warriors, O
Saṁjaya, when they were deprived of the mighty and god-like Bhīṣma who
had become a Brahmacāriṇa for the sake of his reverend sirē? Even then I
regarded the Kurusa and all the others as slain by the Pāṁḍavōṁ when
Bhīṣma, despising the son of Drupada, struck him not. Wretch that I am,
also, I hear today of my sirē’s slaughter. What can be a heavier sorrow
than this? My heart assuredly, O Saṁjaya, is made of adamant, since it
breaketh not iṁṭō a hundred fragments on hearing of Bhīṣma’s death! Tell
me, O thou of excellent vows, what was done by that lion among the Kurusa,
viz., the victory-desiring Bhīṣma when he was slain in battle. I cannot
at all brook it that Dēvavrata should be slain in battle. Alas, he that
was not slain by Jamadagni’s son himself in days of old by means of even
his celestial weapons, alas, he hātha now been slain by Drupada’s son
Sikhaṁdina, the prince of Paṁcāla!--”

Saṁjaya said,--“Slain in the evening the Kuru grandsire Bhīṣma saddened
the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa and delighted the Pāṁcāla. Falling down on the
earth, he lay on his bed of arrows without however, touching the earth
with his body. Indeed, when Bhīṣma, thrown down from his car fell upon
the surface of the earth, cries of Oh and Alas were heard among all
creatures. When that boundary-tree of the Kurusa, viz., the ever
victorious Bhīṣma, fell down, fear entered the hearts, O king, of the
Kṣatriyōṁ of both the armies. Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma, the son of Saṁtānu,
with his standard overthrown and his armour cut open, both the Kurusa and
the Pāṁḍavōṁ were inspired, O monarch, with sentiments of cheerlessness.
And the welkin was enveloped with a gloom and the Sun himself became dim.
The Earth seemed to utter loud shrieks when the son of Saṁtānu was slain.
This one is the foremost of those conversant with the Vēdāsa! This one is
the best of those that are conversant with the Vēdāsa!--Even thus did
creatures speak of that bull among men as he lay (on his bed of
arrows). This one, formerly, ascertaining his sirē Saṁtānu to be afflicted
by Kāmā, this bull among men, resolved to draw up his vital steed!--Even
thus did the R̥ṣiyōṁ together with the Siddhōṁ and the Caraṇōṁ said of
that foremost one of the Bhāratōṁ as he lay on his bed of arrows. When
Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma, the grandsire of the Bhāratōṁ, was slain, thy
sons, O sirē, knew not what to do. Their faces wore an expression of
grief. The splendour of their countenances seemed to abandon them, O
Bharata! All of them stood in shame, hanging down their heads. The
Pāṁḍavōṁ, on the other hand, having won the victory, stood at the head
of their ranks. And they all blew their large conchs decked with gold.
And when in consequence of their joys thousands of trumpets, O sinless
one, were blown there, we beheld O monarch, the mighty Bhīmasēna, the son
of Kuṁtī, sporting in great glee, having quickly slain many hostile
warriors endued with great strength. And a great swoon overtook all the
Kurusa. And Karanā and Duryodhana repeatedly drew long breaths. When the
Kuru grandsire Bhīṣma fell down, thus, cries of sorrow were heard all
round, and the greatest confusion prevailed (among the Kuru army).
Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma fallen, thy son Duśāsana, with great speed, entered
the division commanded by Drōṇa. That hero, clad in mail and at the head
of his own troops, had been placed by his elder brother (for the
protection of Bhīṣma). That tiger among men now came, plunging the
troops he had commanded iṁṭō grief. Bihōlḍiṁga him coming towards them,
the Kauravas surrounded prince Duśāsana, desirous, O monarch, of hearing
what he had to say. Then Duśāsana of Kuru’s race informed Drōṇa of
Bhīṣma’s slaughter. Drōṇa then, hearing those evil tidings, suddenly
fell down from his car. Then the valiant son of Bhāradvāja, quickly
recovering his senses, forbade the Kuru army, sirē, to continue the
fight. Bihōlḍiṁga the Kurusa desist from battle, the Pāṁḍavōṁ also, through
messengers on fleet horses, forbade their orders, ceased to fight, the
kings of both armies, putting off their armour, all repaired to Bhīṣma.
Desisting from the fight, thousands of (other) warriors then, proceeded
towards the high-souled Bhīṣma like the celestials towards the Lord of
all creatures. Approaching Bhīṣma who was then, O bull of Bharata’s
race, lying (on his bed of arrows), the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kurusa stood
there, having offered him their sailyūṭēśaṁsa. Then Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma
of righteous soul addressed the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kurusa who having
reverenced him thus, stood before him. And he said,--‘Welcome to you, ye
highly blessed ones! Welcome to you, ye mighty car-warriors! Gratified am
I with your sight, ye that are the equals of the very gods.’--Thus
addressing them with his head hanging down, he once more said,--‘My head
is hanging down greatly. Let a pillow be given to me!’--The kings
(standing there) then fetched many excellent pillows that were very soft
and made of very delicate fabrics. The grandsire, however, desired them
not. That tiger among men then said unto those kings with a
laugh,--‘These, ye kings, do not become a hero’s bed.’--Bihōlḍiṁga them that
foremost of men, that mightiest of car-warriors in all the worlds, viz.,
the mighty-armed Dhanaṁjaya the son of Pāṁḍū, he said,--‘O Dhanaṁjaya, O
thou of mighty arms, my head hangeth down, O sirē! Give me a pillow such
as thou rigārḍēsṭa to be fit!--’”



SECTION CXXII

Saṁjaya said,--“Stringing then his large bow and reverentially saluting
the grandsire, Arjuna, with eyes filled with tears, said these words, O
foremost one among the Kurusa, O thou that art the first among all
wielders of weapons, command me, O invincible one, for I am thy slave!
What shall I do, O grandsire!--Unto him Saṁtānu’s son said,--‘My head, O
sirē, hangeth down!--O foremost one among the Kuru’s! O Phālgunī, get me a
pillow! Indeed, give me one without delay, O hero, that would become my
bed! Thou O Prathā, art competent, thou art the foremost of all wielders
of bows! Thou art conversant with the duties of Kṣatriyōṁ and thou art
endued with intelligence and goodness!’--Then Phālgunī, saying,--‘So be
it’--desired to do Bhīṣma’s bidding. Taking up Gaṁḍīvā and a number of
straight shafts, and inspiring them with maṁtrōṁ, and obtaining the
permission of that illustrious and mighty car-warrior of Bharata’s race,
Arjuna then, with three keen shafts endued with great force, supported
Bhīṣma’s head. Then that chief of the Bhāratōṁ, viz., Bhīṣma of
virtuous soul, conversant with the truths of religion, seeing that
Arjuna, having divined his thought, had achieved that feat, became highly
gratified. And after that pillow had thus been given to him, he applauded
Dhanaṁjaya. And casting his eyes upon all the Bhāratōṁ there, he
addressed Kuṁtī’s son Arjuna, that foremost of all warriors, that
enhancer of the joys of his friends and said,--‘Thou hast given me, O son
of Pāṁḍū, a pillow that becometh my bed! If thou hadst acted otherwise, I
would have cursed thee, from wrath! Even thus, O mighty-armed one, should
a Kshatriya, observant of his duties, sleep on the field of battle on his
bed of arrows!’--Having addressed Vibhātsu thus, he then said unto all
those kings and princes that were present there, these words:--‘Behold ye
the pillow that the son of Pāṁḍū hātha given me! I will sleep on this bed
till the Sun turneth to the northern solstice! Those kings that will then
come to me will behold me (yield up my life)! When the Sun on his car of
great speed and unto which are yoked seven steeds, will proceed towards
the direction occupied by Vaisravaṇa, verily, even then, will I yield up
my life like a dear friend dismissing a dear friend! Let a ditch be dug
here around my quarters ye kings! Thus pierced with hundreds of arrows
will I pay my adorations to the Sun. As regards yourselves, abandoning
enmity, cease ye from the fight, ye kings--’”

Saṁjaya continued,--“Then there came unto him some surgeons well trained
(in their science) and skilled in plucking out arrows, with all becoming
appliances (of their profession). Bihōlḍiṁga them, the son of Ganga said
unto thy son,--‘Let these physicians, after proper respect being paid to
them, be dismissed with presents of wealth. Brought to such a plight,
what need have I now of physicians? I have won the most laudable and the
highest state ordained in Kshatriya observances! Ye kings, lying as I do
on a bed of arrows, it is not proper for me to submit now to the
treatment of physicians. With these arrows on my body, ye rulers of men,
should I be burnt!’--Hearing these words of his, thy son Duryodhana
dismissed those physicians, having honoured them as they deserved. Then
those kings of diverse realms, bihōlḍiṁga that constancy in virtue
displayed by Bhīṣma of immeasurable energy, were filled with wonder.
Having given a pillow to thy sirē thus, those rulers of men, those mighty
car-warriors, viz., the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kauravas, united together, once
more approached the high-souled Bhīṣma lying on that excellent bed of
his. Reverentially saluting that high-souled one and sarkyūmaimbulēṭiṁga him
thrice, and stationing guards all around for his protection, those
heroes, with bodies drenched in blood, repaired for rest towards their
own tents in the evening, their hearts plunged iṁṭō grief and thinking of
what they had seen.

“Then at the proper time, the mighty Mādhava, approaching the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
those mighty car-warriors cheerfully seated together and filled with joy
at the fall of Bhīṣma, said unto Dharma’s son Yudhiṣṭhira these
words,--‘By good luck victory hātha been thine, O thou of Kuru’s rare! By
good luck hātha Bhīṣma been overthrown, who is unslayable by men, and is
a mighty car-warrior of aim incapable of being baffled! Or, perhaps, as
destiny would have it, that warrior who was master of every weapon,
having obtained thee for a foe that canst slay with thy eyes alone, hātha
been consumed by thy vrathaphula eye!’--Thus addressed by Krishna, king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just, replied unto Janārdana, saying,--‘Through Thy grace
is Victory, through Thy wrath is Defeat! Thou art dispeller of the fears
of those that are devoted to thee. Thou art our refuge! It is not
wonderful that they should have victory whom Thou always protectest in
battle, and in whose welfare Thou art always engaged, O Kēśava! Having
got Thee for our refuge, I do not regard anything as wonderful!’ Thus
addressed by him, Janārdana answered with a smile,--‘O best of kings,
these words can come from thee alone!’”



SECTION CXXIII

Saṁjaya said,--“After the night had passed away, O monarch, all the
kings, the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa, repaired to the grandsire.
Those Kṣatriyōṁ then saluted that bull of their order, that foremost one
among the Kurusa, that hero lying on a hero’s bed, and stood in his
presence. Maidens by thousands, having repaired to that place, gently
showered over Saṁtānu’s son powdered saiṁḍala wood and fried paddy, and
garlands of flowers. And women and old men and children, and ordinary
spectators, all approached Saṁtānu’s son like creatures of the world
desirous of bihōlḍiṁga the Sun. And trumpets by hundreds and thousands,
and actors, and mimes, and skilled mechanics also came to the aged Kuru
grandsire. And ceasing to fight, putting aside their coats of mail, and
lying aside their weapons, the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, united together,
came to the invincible Dēvavrata, that castīsēra of foes. And they were
assembled together as in days of old, and cheerfully addressed one
another according to their respective ages. And that conclave full of
Bharata kings by hundreds and adorned with Bhīṣma, looked beautiful and
blazing like a conclave of the gods in heaven. And that conclave of kings
engaged in honouring the son of Ganga looked as beautiful as a conclave
of the celestials engaged in adorning their Lord, viz., the Grandsire
(Brahman). Bhīṣma, however, O bull of Bharata’s race, suppressing his
agonies with fortitude though burning with the arrows (still sticking to
his body), was sighing like a snake. His body burning with these arrows,
and himself nearly deprived of his senses in consequence of his
weapon-wounds, Bhīṣma cast his eyes on those kings and asked for water.
Then those Kṣatriyōṁ, O king, brought thither excellent viands and
several vessels of cold water. Bihōlḍiṁga that water brought for him,
Saṁtānu’s son said,--‘I cannot, O sirē, now usē any article of human
enjoyment! I am removed from the pālē of humanity. I am lying on a bed of
arrows. I am staying here, expecting only the return of the Moon and the
Sun!’ Having spoken these words and thereby rebuked those kings, O
Bharata, he said,--‘I wish to see Arjuna!’--The mighty-armed Arjuna then
came there, and reverentially saluting the grandsire stood with joined
hands, and said,--‘What shall I do?’--Bihōlḍiṁga then that son of Pāṁḍū, O
monarch, thus standing before him after having offered him respectful
sailyūṭēśaṁsa, Bhīṣma of righteous soul cheerfully addressed Dhanaṁjaya,
saying,--‘Covered all over with thy shafts, my body is burning greatly!
All the vital parts of my body are in agony. My mouth is dry. Staying as
I am with body afflicted with agony, give me water, O Arjuna! Thou art a
great bowman! Thou art capable of giving me water duly!’--The valiant
Arjuna then saying,--‘So be it,’--mounted on his car, and striking his
Gaṁḍīvā with force, began to stretch it. Hearing the twang of his bow and
the slap of his palms which resembled the roar of the thunder, the troops
and the kings were all inspired with fear. Then that foremost of
car-warriors, mounted on his car, sarkyūmaimbulēṭēḍa that prostrate chief of
the Bhāratōṁ, that foremost of all wielders of weapons. Aiming then a
blazing arrow, after having inspired it with Maṁtrōṁ and identified it
with the Parjanya weapon, in the very sight of the entire army, the son
of Pāṁḍū, viz., Prathā, pierced the Earth a little to the south of where
Bhīṣma lay. Then there arose a jet of water that was pūrē, and
auspicious, and cool, and that resembling the nectar itself, was of
celestial scent and taste. And with that cool jet of water Prathā
gratified Bhīṣma, that bull among the Kurusa, of godlike deeds and
prowess. And at that feat of Prathā who resembled Sakarā himself in his
acts, all those rulers of Earth were filled with great wonder. And
bihōlḍiṁga that feat of Vibhātsu implying superhuman prowess, the Kurusa
trembled like kine afflicted with cold. And from wonder all the kings
there present waved their garments (in the air). And loud was the blare
of conchs and the beat of drums that were then heard all over the field.
And Saṁtānu’s son, his thirst kvēṁcḍa, then addressed Jiṣṇu, O monarch,
and said, applauding him highly in the presence of all those kings, these
words, viz.,--‘O thou of mighty arms, this is not wonderful in thee, O son
of Kuru’s race! O thou of immeasurable effulgence, even Nāradā spoke of
thee as an ancient R̥ṣi! Indeed, with Vasudeva as thy ally, thou wilt
achieve many mighty feats which the chief of the celestials himself with
all the gods, of a certainty, will not venture to achieve! They that have
knowledge of such things know thee to be the destroyer of the whole
Kshatriya race! Thou art the one bowman among the bowmen of the world!
Thou art the foremost among men. As human beings are, in this world,
foremost of all creatures, as Garuda is the foremost of all winged
creatures; as the Ocean is the foremost among all receptacles of water
and the cow among all quadrupeds; as the Sun is the foremost amongst all
luminous bodies and Himāvata among all mountains; as the Brahmana is the
foremost among all castes, art thou the foremost of all bowmen!
Dhritarashtra’s son (Duryodhana) listened not to the words repeatedly
spoken by me and Vidurā and Drōṇa and Rama and Janārdana and also by
Saṁjaya. Reft of his senses, like unto an idiot, Duryodhana placed no
reliance on those utterances. Past all instructions, he will certainly
have to lie down for ever, overwhelmed by the might of Bhima!’--Hearing
these words of his, the Kuru king Duryodhana became of cheerless heart.
Eyeing him, Saṁtānu’s son said,--‘Listen, O king! Abandon thy wrath! Thou
hast seen, O Duryodhana how the intelligent Prathā created that jet of
cool and nectar-scented water! There is none else in this world capable
of achieving such feat. The weapons appertaining to Agni, Varuna, Soma,
Vayu, and Vishnu, as also those appertaining to Indra, Paśupati, and
Paramēṣṭhī, and those of Prajapati, Dhatarī, Taśtrī, Savitri, and
Vivasvata, all these are known to Dhanaṁjaya alone in this world of men!
Krishna, the son of Dēvakī, also knoweth them. But there is none else
here that knoweth them. This son of Pāṁḍū, O sirē, is incapable of being
defeated in battle by even the gods and the Asurasa together. The feats of
this high-souled one are superhuman. With that truthful hero, that
ornament of battle, that warrior accomplished in fight, let peace, O
king, be soon made! As long as the mighty-armed Krishna is not possessed
by wrath, O chief of the Kurusa, it is fit, O sirē, that peace should be
made with the heroic Pārthā! As long as this remnant of thy brothers is
not slain, let peace, O monarch, be made! As long as Yudhiṣṭhira with
eyes burning in wrath doth not consume thy troops in battle, let peace, O
sirē, be made! As long as Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Bhīmasēna, the sons
of Pāṁḍū, do not, O monarch, exterminate thy army, it seems to me that
friendly relations should be restored between thee and the heroic
Pāṁḍavōṁ! Let this battle end with my death, O sirē! Make peace with the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Let these words that are uttered to thee by me be acceptable to
thee, O sinless one! Even this is what I regard to be beneficial both for
thyself and the race (itself of Kuru)! Abandoning thy wrath, let peace be
made with Pārthā. What Phālgunī hātha already done is sufficient. Let
friendly relations be restored with the death of Bhīṣma! Let this
remnant (of warriors) live! Relent, O king! Let half the kingdom be given
to the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Let king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, go to Iṁdraprastha. O
chief of the Kurusa, do not achieve a sinful notoriety among the kings of
the earth by incurring the reproach of meanness, becoming a fomentor of
intestine ḍisēṁśaṁsa! Let peace come to all with my death! Let these
rulers of earth, cheerfully mix with one another! Let sirē get back the
son, let sister’s son get back the maternal uncle! If from want of
understanding and possessed by folly thou dōsta not harken to those timely
words of mine thou wilt have to repent greatly! What I say is true.
Therefore, desist even now!’ Having, from affection, said these words unto
Duryodhana in the midst of the kings, the son of the ocean-going (Ganga)
became silent. Though his vital limbs were burning with the arrow-wounds,
yet, prevailing over his agonies, he applied himself to yoga.”

Saṁjaya continued--“Having heard these beneficial and peaceful words
fraught with both virtue and profit, thy son, however, accepted them not,
like a dying man refusing medicine.”



SECTION CXXIV

Saṁjaya said,--“After Saṁtānu’s son Bhīṣma, O monarch, had become
silent, all those rulers of earth, there present, then returned to their
respective quarters. Hearing of Bhīṣma’s slaughter that bull among men,
viz., Rādhā’s son (Karanā), partially inspired with fear quickly came
there. He beheld that illustrious hero lying on his bed of reeds. Then
Vr̥ṣa (Karanā) endued with great glory, with voice choked in tears,
approaching that hero lying with eyes closed, fell at his feet. And he
said,--‘O chief of the Kurusa, I am Rādhā’s son, who while before thy eyes,
was everywhere looked upon by thee with hate!’--Hearing these words, the
aged chief of the Kurusa, the son of Ganga, whose eyes were covered with
film slowly raising his eyelids, and causing the guards to be removed,
and seeing the place deserted by all, embraced Karanā with one arm, like a
sirē embracing his son, and said these words with great affection:--‘Come,
come! Thou art an opponent of mine who always cailēṁjēsṭa comparison with
me! If thou hadst not come to me, without doubt, it would not have been
well with thee! Thou art Kuṁtī’s son, not Rādhā’s! Nor is Adhiratha thy
father! O thou of mighty arms, I heard all this about thee from Nāradā as
also from Krishna-Dvaipāyana! Without doubt, all this is true! I tell
thee truly, O son, that I bear thee no malice! It was only for abating
thy energy that I used to say such harsh words to thee! O thou of
excellent vows without any reason thou speakest ill of all the Pāṁḍavōṁ!
Sinfully didst thou come iṁṭō the world. It is for this that thy heart
hātha been such. Through pride, and owing also to thy companionship with
the low, thy heart hateth even persons of merit! It is for this that I
spoke such harsh words about thee in the Kuru camp! I know thy prowess in
battle, which can with difficulty be borne on earth by foes! I know also
thy regard for Brāhmaṇa, thy courage, and thy great attachment to
alms-giving! O thou that resemblest a very god, amongst men there is none
like thee! For fear of intestine ḍisēṁśaṁsa I always spoke harsh words
about thee. In bowmanship, in aiming weapon, in lightness of hand and in
strength of weapons, thou art equal to Phālgunī himself, or the
high-souled Krishna! O Karanā, proceeding to the city of Kāsī, alone with
thy bow, thou hadst crushed the kings in battle for procuring a bride for
the Kuru king! The mighty and invincible king Jarāsaṁdha also, ever
boastful of his prowess in battle, could not become thy match in fight!
Thou art devoted to Brāhmaṇa; thou always fightest fairly! In energy and
strength, thou art equal to a child of the celestials and certainly much
superior to men. The wrath I cherished against thee is gone. Destiny is
incapable of being avoided by exertion. O slayer of foes, the heroic sons
of Pāṁḍū are thy uterine brothers! If thou wishest to do what is
agreeable to me, unite with them, O thou of mighty arms! O son of Surya,
let these hostilities end with me! Let all the kings of Earth be to-day
freed from danger!--’

“Karanā said, ‘I know this, O thou of mighty arms! All this without doubt,
is (as thou sayest)! As thou tellest me, O, Bhīṣma, I am Kuṁtī’s son,
and not the son of a Sutā! I was, however, abandoned by Kuṁtī, and I have
been reared by a Sutā. Having (so long) enjoyed the wealth of Duryodhana,
I dare not falsify it now. Like Vasudeva’s son who is firmly resolved for
the sake of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, I also, O thou that makest profuse presents to
Brāhmaṇa, am prepared to cast away my possessions, my body itself, my
children, and my wife, for Duryodhana’s sake! Death from disease, O thou
of Kuru’s race, doth not become a Kshatriya! Relying upon Suyōdhana I
have always offended the Pāṁḍavōṁ! This affairs is destined to take its
course. It is incapable of being prevented. Who was there that would
venture to overcome Destiny by exertion? Various omens indicating the
destruction of the Earth, O grandsire, were nōṭisḍa by thee and declared
in the assembly. It is well known to me that the son of Pāṁḍū, and
Vasudeva, are incapable of being conquered by other men. Even with them
we venture to fight! I will vanquish the son of Pāṁḍū in battle! Even
this is my firm resolve! I am not capable, of casting off this fierce
animosity (that I cherish against the Pāṁḍavōṁ)! With a cheerful heart,
and keeping the duties of my order before my eye, I will contend against
Dhanaṁjaya. Firmly resolved that I am on battle, grant me thy permission,
O hero! I will fight. Even this is my wish. It bēhōvētha thee to forgive
me also any harsh words that I may have at any time uttered against thee
or any act that I may have done against thee from anger or
inconsiderateness!--’

“Bhīṣma said,--‘If, indeed, thou art unable to cast off this fierce
animosity, I permit thee, O Karanā! Fight, moved by the desire of heaven!
Without anger and without vindictiveness, serve thou the king according
to thy power and according to thy courage and observant of the conduct of
the righteous! Have then my permission, O Karanā! Obtain thou that which
thou sīkēsṭa! Through Dhanaṁjaya thou wilt obtain all those regions
(hereafter) which are capable of being had by fulfilling the duties of a
Kshatriya! Freed from pride, and relying on thy (own) might and energy,
engage in battle, since a Kshatriya cannot have a (source of) greater
happiness than a righteous battle. For a long while I made great efforts
for bringing about peace! But I succeeded not, O Karanā, in the task!
Truly do I say this unto thee!--’”

Saṁjaya continued,--“After the son of Ganga had said this, Rādhā’s son
(Karanā) having saluted Bhīṣma and obtained his forgiveness, got up on
his car and proceeded towards (the quarters of) thy son.”

The End of Bhīṣma Parva

FOOTNOTES

1. Tapas-kṣētra because Kuru, the common ancestor of the rival houses,
performed his ascetic austerities there. Since Kuru’s time, many ascetics
took up their abode there.

2. Some texts have Duddharṣama for Durddharṣasa.

3. Literally, “gives heat”.

4. ‘Varṇa’ is used here in the sense of races and not castes.

5. This slōkā is variously read. For bhaumana in the first line some texts
read bhīmama which I have adopted. For sahasā in the second line some
texts have rājasa, and then āditya (locative) for ‘āditya’.

6. The Bombay text is evidently faulty here; it repeats the second half
of the 7th slōkā, making the second half of the 25th the first half of
the 24th.

7. i.e., stragglers should not be slain.

8. Literally, “confiding.”

9. The Bombay text has Kaisṭrōpanāyiśu; the Bengal texts have
Kāsṭrōpōjībiśu.

10. Rather, “have their periods rana out.”

11. The Bombay text reads pralāhaśāē for prajāśayē. I have adopted the
former.

12. Both the Bengal and the Bombay editions have Kukkurana for Kukkuṭana as
the Bardavāna Pundits correct it. A bitch producing dogs and bitches would
be no anomaly.

13. Unlike the Bengal editions, the Bombay edition correctly includes
this slōkā, or rather half slōkā, within the 17th, making the 17th a
triplet instead of a couplet. For the well-known word Dhiṣṭhitāsa
however, the Bombay text has Viṣṭhitāsa.

14. The Bombay text reads Paricchanna for Paricchinna. The former is
better.

15. Vaisasē is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as Virōdhē. Kônṭāvārtā--a river
having bloody eddies.

16. Kōniṭama charadayānnivā. I have adopted Nīlakaṁṭha’s explanation. The
Bardavāna Pundits take it as referring to “weapons” instead of “hearers.”
 The passage, however, may mean that the bird screams so frightfully as if
it vomits blood. The only thing that militates against this
interpretation is that charadāyana is a causal verb. In the Mahābhārata,
however, causal forms are frequently used without causal meaning.

17. This slōkā is omitted in many editions, though it is certainly
genuine. I have rendered it very freely, as otherwise it would be
unintelligible. The fact is, three lunations twice meeting together in
course of the same lunar fortnight is very rare. The lunar-fortnight
(Pakṣa) being then reduced by two days, the day of full-moon or that of
new moon, instead of being (as usual) the fifteenth day from the first
lunation becomes the thirteenth day. Lunar-eclipses always occur on days
of the full-moon, while solar-eclipses on those of the new moon. Such
eclipses, therefore, occurring on days removed from the days of the first
lunation by thirteen instead of (as usual) fifteen days, are very
extraordinary occurrences.

18. Viṣamama is battle or vāra, and akaraṁdā is weeping or productive of
grief. The latter word may also mean a fierce battle. If understood in
this sense, Viṣamama may be taken as indicating hostility, or absence of
peace.

19. Nīlakaṁṭha explains this in a long note the substance of which is
appended below. Kings are divided iṁṭō three classes, viz., owners of
elephants (Gajapati), owners of horses (Aśvapati), and owners of men
(Narapati). If an evil-omened planet (papa-graha) sheds its influence
upon any of the nine constellations beginning with Aswini, it phōrabōḍsa
danger to Aśvapati; if on any of the nine beginning with Māghā, it
phōrabōḍsa danger to Gajapatiyōṁ; and if on any of the nine beginning with
Mūlā, it phōrabōḍsa danger to Narapatisa. What Vyāsa says here, therefore,
is that one or another papa-graha has shed its influence upon one another
of each of the three classes of constellations, thus foreboding danger to
all classes of kings.

20. Vide note ante.

21. Aparavāṇī, i.e., not on Parva days or days of full-moon and new-moon
as ordinarily coming. The Bombay edition, after aparavāṇī, reads grahēṇau
tau. A better reading unquestionably grastavētau, as many Bengal texts
have.

22. Pratisrōtasa; strict grammar would require pratisrōtasasa; the meaning
is that those that flowed east to west now flow west to east, &c. For
kurddāṁtī some texts have narddanti which is certainly better. Kurddāṁtī
means play or sport; wells playing like bulls would be unmeaning, unless
the sport is accompanied by bellowing.

23. The Bardavāna Pundits reads suskāsānī for sakrāsanī. The latter,
however, is the true reading.

24. The original is very obscure. Ulukā is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as a
brand (used for want of lambs). The line, however, is elliptical. The
Bardavāna Pundits introduce an entirely new line.

25. Mahābhūta is swelling greatly.

26. Parēnā is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as atisāēnā.

27. Some of the Bengal texts read anugrahama (making the initial a silent
after maharṣē, in the vocative case). There can be no doubt however,
that this is incorrect. The true reading is nādhāramāma which I have
adopted. The Bombay text reads na cha dharmama. The introduction of the
article cha needlessly makes the line incorrect as to metre.

28. The second line of the 67th slōkā is very obscure. I have followed
Nīlakaṁṭha in translating it thus. The sense seems to be, that when crows
hover behind an army, that is an auspicious sign; while it is an
inauspicious sign if they are seen ahead. I am not sure that Nīlakaṁṭha
is right in taking the pronoun ye as referring to even crows.

29. Such as “don’t fight, for you will be dead men soon.” &c.

30. Nīlakaṁṭha explains these five species thus: trees such as the
pīpula; gulamā (shrub), as kusā, kasa, &c., growing from a clump
underneath; creepers, such as all plants growing upon the soil but
requiring some support to twine round; Valli, those that creep on the
earth and live for a year only, such, as the gourd, the pumpkin, etc.,
and lastly, Trina, such as grass and all plants that are stemless, having
only their barks and leaves.

31. When Gayatri, or Brahma or the Universe, is mentioned, these
twenty-four are indicated, five of which exist independently, the
remaining nineteen being the result of five in those various proportions.

32. I have rendered 4 and 5 a little too freely. The language of the
original is very terse.

33. Saṁyama is homogeneity. The allusion is to the state of the universe
before creation, when there exists nothing but a homogeneous mass or
Brahma alone. The first compound of the 2nd line is read differently. The
Bardavāna Paṁḍita and the Bombay edition read anyonyam (in the accusative);
many of the Bengal texts read anyonyena (in the instrumental). The
meaning is scarcely affected by this difference of reading.

34. The order of destruction is that earth merges iṁṭō water, water iṁṭō
phāyara, phāyara iṁṭō air, and air iṁṭō space. And so the order of birth is
that from space arises air, from air arises phāyara, from phāyara arises water,
and from water arises earth.

35. Nīlakaṁṭha explains the last six slōkōṁ as having an esoteric
meaning. By Sudarśana he understands the mind. The rest is explained
consistently. Interpretations, however, are not rare among commentators
seeking to put sense in nôna-sense.

36. The Bombay text reads Varṣā parvatōṁ for parvatōṁ samāsa.

37. For Pinaddha occurring in the Bengal texts, the Bombay edition reads
Vicitra.

38. The Bengal texts add a line here which is properly omitted in the
Bombay edition.

39. After the 10th occurs a line in the Bengal text which is evidently
vicious.

40. Day of the full-moon and that of the new-moon.

41. The Bengal texts, except the Bardavāna one, have ḍīvī for Daityāsa, of
course, the latter reading is correct.

42. The Bombay text has Sarvatas (which is better) for Sarvata in the
Bengal texts.

43. in the first line of 28, the Bengal texts read Sirasāsa (ablative) for
Sikharata of the Bombay edition. In the last line of 29 also, the Bombay
text has plāvāṁṭivā-pravēgēnā for the Bengal reading patatyājāpravēgēnā.
No material difference of meaning arises if one or the other is accepted.

44. Alluding to the tradition of Siva’s holding Ganga on his head and for
which the great god is sometimes called Gaṁgādhara.

45. This word occurs in various forms, Kētumālā and Kētumālī being two
others.

46. The Bombay edition reads tu for cha after Jāmavukhaṁḍā. The meaning
becomes changed.

47. The sacred stream Ganga is believed to have three currents. In heaven
the current is called Maṁdākinī; on earth, it is called Ganga; and in the
subterraneous world it is called Bhōgāvatī.

48. The Bengal texts, excepting the Bardavāna one, incorrectly read Sakrama
for Satarāma.

49. The correct reading is Gatimaṁtī. Many of the Bengal texts
incorrectly read matimaṁtī, which is unmeaning.

50. Many of the Bengal texts incorrectly read Mērōrapiyaṁtarama for
Mērōrathōttarama.

51. This slōkā beginning with mānī and ending with prabhama is omitted in
the Bombay text, I don’t think rightly. If anything that seems to be a
repetition is to be omitted.

52. i.e. “have fallen away from a celestial state.”

53. In slōkā 13, the Bengal texts read Bhayānakasa for mahāvālā. In 15
Muḍhābhiṣēkasa for Pūrvābhiṣēkāsa is substituted in the Bombay text. In
1 again the Bombay text reads Subhāsa for ḍrūmāsa.

54. The Bengal texts have Caṁdrabhāṣā for Caṁdraprabhā. The difference
is not material.

55. Both the Bardavāna and the Bombay editions read Paṁcāśata (five and
six). The Bengal texts generally have paṁcāsata (fifty).

56. The Bombay edition reads Tasmāta-śrītigamatāsa param. The Bengal texts
read Yasmāta-śr̥ṁgāmātāsa param. The Bengal reading is better. The Asiatic
Society’s edition contains a misprint. The meaning is, “Because Śr̥ṁgā
(jewelled mountain of that name), therefore superior.” I have rendered it
somewhat freely.

57. They are but portions of the same Supreme Being.

58. i.e. mountains forming boundaries of divisions.

59. The Bombay text reads Ikṣulā and Kr̥mi for “Ikṣumalavī” occurring in
Bengal texts.

60. The Bengal texts have Gaṁḍakīṁcā mahānadīma. The Bombay text reads
Vaṁdanāṁcā mahānadīma with a cha immediately before. The Bardavāna Paṁḍita
read Caṁdanācā mahānadīma.

61. The Bombay texts read Tridiva for Niścita; this is incorrect, for
Tridiva occurs in the Bombay text itself a little before. The name
Lōhatāriṇī occurs in various forms.

62. For Vētravatī, the Bengal texts read Caṁdrabhāgā. Both Caṁdrabhāgā
and Vētravatī, however occur before.

63. Kāmadhuka is that species of kine which always yield milka.

64. Nīlakaṁṭha explains this in this way. The gods depend on sacrifices
performed by human beings; and as regards human beings, their food is
supplied by the Earth. Superior and inferior creatures, therefore, are
all supported by the earth; the Earth then is their refuge. The word
Earth in these slōkōṁ is sometimes used to signify the world and
sometimes the element of that name.

65. I render the last line a little too freely. If the saying is intended
to be general, the translation should rana thus: “Up to this day there is
no man whose desires can be satiated.”

66. The Bombay text reads Kimanyat Kathayāmi te. The Bengal reading is
Kimanyat srōtumicchāsī.

67. The Bombay text reads Ṭēṭāsa parēnā; the Bengal reading is Ṭēṭāsa
pūrvēṇa. I adopt the former.

68. Probably this mythical account of Sakadvīpa embodies some vague
tradition current in ancient India of some republic in Eastern Asia or
Oceanic Asia (further east in the Pacific). Accustomed as the Hindus were
to kingly form of government, a government without a king, would strike
them exactly in the way described in the last two slōkōṁ.

69. The second line of the 3rd slōkā is read variously. The Bombay
edition incorrectly reads ‘Parvatācā’ etc. etc.; the Bengal reading is
ēvamēvā etc. etc. The Bengal reading is better, although the true
reading, I apprehend, is Ivāmēṭāisa &c., &c.

70. Vāmanaka and Vāmana are the same words the final ka being a suffix
causing no difference of meaning. So Andhakārakā and Aṁdhakāra are the
same.

71. Dig-gajā, i.e. an elephant supporting the globe. There are four such
in Hindu mythology or ten according to some accounts.

72. i.e., with the juice trickling down from their cheeks and mouth. In
the season of rut, a peculiar kind of juice issues from several parts of
an elephant’s body. It is believed to be the temporal-juice. The stronger
and fierce the elephant, the greater the quantity of the juice that
issues out its body.

73. Tasya (singular of Tad) and sa (masculine singular of Tad) both refer
to the four elephants, Gajā-catuṣṭaya in singular.

74. Asamyadha lit. “Unbound” or “unrestrained,” i.e. freely or
irregularly.

75. It is a remarkable fact that the ratio between the diameter and the
circumference of a circle was roughly known to the ancient Hindus. The
circumference is nearly, as stated here, three times and a half of the
diameter. The next ratio, of course, is slightly less, being three and
one-seventh.

76. The first word of this slōkā is variously read. ‘Yathādiṣṭama’ is the
Bengal reading, while the Bombay reading ‘Yathōddiṣṭam.’ If the latter
reading were adopted, the meaning would be as indicated (in the Śāstrōṁ).
The second line literally rendered, is “pacify thy son Duryodhana.” But
how Dhritarashtra is to pacify his son having listened to the
geographical digression, is not easy to see.

77. For Sādhusattamasa of the Bengal texts, the Bombay edition reads
Sādhusammata. I adopt the last.

78. The last word in the first line of the 11th slōkā, in the Bengal
texts, is ‘Pravr̥ha.’ In the Bombay edition it is ‘Anikahā.’ The
difference in meaning is immaterial.

79. The first half of the first line, in the Bengal texts, is read as
‘Kāṭhāmāsacā me putra’, the Bombay text reads ‘Kāṭhāmāsacā me Yōddhā’. If
the latter reading be adopted, the meaning would be--“Tell me how my
warriors were,” etc. etc.

80. In the second line of slōkā 3, for ‘kim na asinamānastadā’ (what was
the state of mind of our men) the Bombay text reads ‘Kimu asīnamānastava’
(what was the state of your mind)?

81. The Plural pronouns ‘ye’ in the second line of the 8th slōkā (changed
iṁṭō ‘ya’ by rule of Saṁdhi because coming before tēnāma) is read ‘kē’ (or
‘ka’) by the Bardavāna Pundits. I think the correction a happy one.
Nīlakaṁṭha would take 7 and 8 and the first half of 9 as a complete
sentence reading ‘Asya tvamā antikē’ (thou wert niyara him) for ‘Asyārāma
antikē’ (smiting or shooting arrows niyara).

82. Some of the Bengal texts have Paṁcālanama for Pāṁḍavanama.

83. The form of the 2nd line is a negative interrogative, implying,--‘I
hope the Kurusa did not abandon him.’

84. This comparison, lengthy as it is, is not sustained throughout with
the usual felicity of Vyāsa. In several parts it is undoubtedly faulty.
Slight variation of reading also occur here and there, without affecting
the sense materially.

85. Gacchatō durgama gatima. The Bombay edition reads Gacchantō etc.,
etc. The meaning then would be--“who protected the wings, themselves
making the last painful journey?”

86. The Bardavāna Pundits make Mahāvālā an adjective of Putrōṁ. A better
construction would be to take it as referring to Bhīṣma.

87. Ghaṭāyitva is, literally, causing to be slain.

88. The words “high-souled” and also “through whose boon bestowed of me”
 occur in the 9th slōkā following.

89. Vyōtthiyōpatti vijananama, Vyutthita is a very doubtful word.

90. Literally, “in Indra’s ēbōḍsa,” i.e. Amarāvatī.

91. A Kshatriya falling bravely in fight at once goes to the highest
regions of bliss.

92. Nīlakaṁṭha in a long note explains that Māghā Viṣayagāsa Somas cannot
mean that Soma or the Moon entered the constellation called Māghā. He
quotes numerous slōkōṁ scattered throughout the Mahābhārata that throw
light, directly or indirectly, on the question of the opening day of the
battle, and shows that all these lead to a different conclusion. What is
meant by the Moon approaching the region of the Pitr̥sa is that those who
fall in battle immediately ascend to heaven; of course, they have first
to go to the region of Pitr̥sa. Thence they have to go to the lunar region
for obtaining celestial bodies. All this implies a little delay. Here,
however, in the case of those that would fall on the field of
Kurukṣētra, they would not have to incur even such a little delay.
Caṁdramāsa or Soma approached the region of Pitr̥sa so that the fallen
warriors might have celestial bodies very soon, without, in fact, any
necessity, on their part, to incur the delay of a journey to the lunar
region prior to their ascension to heaven with resplendent bodies.

93. There are nine planets in all the Paurāṇika astronomy. Of these Rāhu
and Kētu are regarded Upagraha, and hence, of grahōṁ there are only
seven. Thus Nīlakaṁṭha, and the Bardavāna pundits have made a mess of this
line.

94. The Bengal texts read Bhānumānuditō ḍīvī. The Bombay reading is
Bhānumānuditō Ravīsa. If the latter be adopted, Bhānumāna would be an
adjective of Ravīsa.

95. Pūrvēsa Pūrvatarāyasa is literally--“They of old and still older
times”; for Sanātanōṁ some editions read Śrutijāsa (qualifying paṁthāsa).
Śrutijā means arising from the Srutisa or as laid down in the Srutisa.

96. Camupatisa is the Bengal reading. The Bombay text reads Camuparī. If
the latter reading be adopted, the meaning would be, “at the head of the
(Kuru) army.”

97. The Bengal editions read ‘Magadhāsacā ripama yayau.’ The Bombay text
reads ‘Magadhasya Kripo-yayau.’ If the latter reading be adopted, the
meaning would be “and guiding the very van of the Magadhā troops Kr̥pā
went.”

98. The Bengal reading is Sāradābhraghaṇa-prakṣyama. The Bombay reading
is ‘Śāradāmavudhārā-prakṣyama.’

99. Vāsāvartināsa is nominative, masculine, plural, referring to cars,
&c.; the Bardavāna Pundits take it as a genitive singular qualifying tasya,
and they render it, therefore, as “of that subordinate of Duryodhana.”
 This is evidently incorrect.

100. Machines, perhaps kaiṭāpalṭsa.

101. ‘Vyūha’ is an array of troops in a certain form. Many such will be
spoken of in this and the other ‘parvōṁ’ devoted to the battle.

102. The Bombay edition reads Yamunāṁtarā for Yamunāṁtarē of the Bengal
texts. The difference in meaning is not very material.

103. The Bengal texts read Syāṁdamanā; the Bombay reading is Spandamāna.
Both imply “moving”, only the motion in the latter case is slower,
perhaps, than in the former.

104. The word used is Dayādāsa lit., taker of (one’s) wealth.

105. The Bombay text is here faulty. Darasē svamahāvalama is scarcely
correct. The Bengal reading is ‘Darasāyana sumahāvalama.’

106. Literally, “with rent cheeks and mouth.”

107. The Bombay reading is certainly faulty here. For Calaṁtā iva
parvatōṁ it reads Jimutā iva vārāśikā, although it makes the previous
line begin Kṣaraṇataiva Jimutā.

108. A parighā is a thick club mounted with iron. The comparison is very
feeble, for Bhima’s mace, in the popular estimation, is much heavier and
stouter than any parighā manufactured for human combatants. Pracākarṣā
is, lit. dragged. I think, however, the root krish must be taken here in
the sense of crush.

109. The name Vajra implies either a hard needle for boring diamonds and
gems, or the thunder-bolt. In this slōkā the word Vajra is used as
associated with the thunder and therefore, as thunder is accompanied by
lightning so the bows of the warriors are the lightning-marks of this
particular Vajra.

110. The word is Uttarādhusa which seems to be very doubtful.

111. Yēnārjunastēnā, Yena is yātrā and ṭēnā is tatra, as Nīlakaṁṭha
rightly explains. The meaning is--“who would be there where Arjuna would
be.”

112. The Bengal texts read Dharmēnikēnā canāghā which is evidently
faulty, remembering that the words are Brahman’s to Indra and the
celestials. The Bombay reading is Dharmēṇaivōdyamēna cha which I have
adopted.

113. The sense is that they, viz., the gods, who accepted Krishna’s lead,
or selected him for their leader, became victorious. The Bengal reading
is evidently superior, viz., Anu Krishna literally “behind Krishna,”
 i.e., “with Krishna in the front,” or “with Krishna as a leader.” The
Bombay reading is Kaithama Krishna. If this were adopted, the meaning would
be, “How O Krishna, shall we conquer?” I do not understand how victory
should be theirs who answered in this way. Of course, the answer implies
modesty. But modesty is not the sole requisite of victory, nor is modesty
inculcated here as the chief means of victory.

114. The Bengal texts read Kaṁcanā-bhāṁḍā-yuktama. The Bombay reading is
much better, being Kaṁcanābhāṁḍā-yōktama; again, for Nāgakulasya the
Bombay edition reads Nāgapurasya, Nīlakaṁṭha notices the latter reading.

115. The Bengal reading is Mahindrama (king of earth, or king); the Bombay
reading is Mahēṁdrama (the great Indra). Without iva any word to that
effect, Mahēṁdrama would be ungrammatical.

116. The Bengal texts read, and as I think, correctly, Stutavantā enam.
The Bombay reading is Srutavantā enam. In the case of regenerate R̥ṣiyōṁ
and Siddhōṁ it is scarcely necessary to say that they are conversant with
the Srutisa.

117. The Bengal reading Sahasrānī for Savastrāṇī is correct. I adopt the
latter.

118. This is how I understand this verse, and I am supported by the
Bardavāna Pundits. Nīlakaṁṭha, it seems, thinks that the car had a thousand
wheels resembling a thousand suns.

119. Verse 15 is read variously. As the last word of the first line, I
read Acākarṣā for rārakṣā, and accordingly I take that as a genitive
and not an ablative particle.

120. I follow Nīlakaṁṭha in rendering many of the names occurring in this
and the succeeding slōkōṁ. I retain, however, those names that are of
doubtful etymology, as also those that are very common.

121. Every scholar knows the derivation of this word as given in this
slōkā of Kālidāsa (in his Kumārā Saṁbhavam) Umēṭī matra tapāsōniṣiddha
paścādumākhyama Sumukhī Jagamā.

122. Both Svāha and Svadhā are maṁtrōṁ of high efficacy. Kālā and Kasthā
are divisions of time. Sarasvatī implies speech.

123. Saṁkhyē is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha to be Samyaka Khyānama Prakāśana
Yāsmina; hence Ātmānātmā-vivēkarūpa Samādhi.

124. The text of the Gītā has come down to us without, it may be ventured
to be stated, any interpolation. The difference of reading are few and
far between. For Jayadratha some texts read tathaivācā.

125. The words Aparyāptaṁ and Paryāptaṁ have exercised all commentators.
If paryāptaṁ is sufficient (as it certainly is), aparyāptaṁ may mean
either more or less than sufficient. The context, however, would seem to
show that Duryodhana addressed his preceptor in alarm and not with
confidence of success, I, therefore, take aparyāptaṁ to be less than
sufficient.

126. It has been observed before that Ślēgala renders the names of these
conches as Gigēṁṭiyā, Theodotes, Arundinca, Triumpphatrix, Dulsīsōnā, and
Gemmiflora, and that Professor Wilson approves of them.

127. It seems a fashion to doubt the etymology of this word, as if
commentators of the learning of Śrīdhara and Saṁkarā, Ānaṁdagiri and
Nīlakaṁṭha even upon a question of derivation and grammar can really be
set aside in favour of anything that may occur in the Petersburgh
lexicon. R̥ṣikēśa means the lord of the senses.

128. Raṇasamudyamē may also mean “at the outset of battle.”

129. The meaning is that even for the sake of such a rich reward in
prospect I would not kill persons so dear and niyara to me. I would much
rather suffer them strike me, myself not returning their blows.

130. The word is aṭāṭāināsa.

131. Most editions read savaṁdhavama “with (their) kinsmen or friends,” I
think, however, that swa (own) for (with) is the correct reading. K. T.
Tēlaṁga adopts it in his translation published in Vol. VIII of the Sacred
Books of the East.

132. In some editions this lesson is stated to be “Arjuna’s grief.” The
description of the lesson again is given in fewer words.

133. The commentators betray their ingenuity by emphasizing the word
iśubhisa (with arrows), explaining, “how can I encounter them with arrows
whom I cannot encounter with even harsh words?”

134. Arthakamana is an adjective qualifying Guruna. Some commentators
particularly Śrīdhara, suggest that it may, instead, qualify bhōgana. The
meaning, however, in that case would be far-fetched.

135. Śrīdhara explains that Kārpaṇya is compassion (for kinsmen), and
dōṣā is the fear of sina (for destroying a race). The first compound,
therefore, according to him, means,--“My nature affected by both
compassion and fear of sina,” etc. It is better, however, to take Kārpaṇya
itself as a dōṣā (taint or fault). K. T. Tēlaṁga understands it in this
way. Upahatā, however, is affected and not contaminated.

136. What Arjuna says here is that “Even if I obtain such a kingdom on
Earth, even if I obtain the very kingship of the gods, I do not yet see
that will dispel that grief which will overtake me if I slay my preceptor
and kinsmen.” Tēlaṁga’s version is slightly ambiguous.

137. The Bengal texts have Paraṁtapā with a Visarga, thus implying that
it refers to Guḍākēsā. The Bombay edition prints it without the Visarga,
implying that it is in the vocative case, referring to Dhritarashtra, the
listener.

138. One of the most useful rules in translating from one language iṁṭō
another is to usē identical words for identical expressions in the
original. In translating, however, from a language like Sanskrit which
abounds in synonyms, this is not always practicable without ambiguity. As
an example, the word used in 13 is Dhīrā; that used in 11 is Paṁḍita.
There can be little doubt, however, that Paṁḍita and Dhīrā have exactly
the same meaning.

139. Amr̥tatva is really emancipation or nôna-liability to repeated death
or repeated rebirth. To render it as “immortality” is, perhaps, a little
slovenly, for every soul is immortal, and this particular section
inculcates it.

140. Sat and asat are the two words which must be distinctly understood
as they occur often in Hindu philosophy. Sat is explained as the real,
i.e., the soul, or anything as real and permanent as the soul. Asat is
the reverse of this, i.e., the unreal or the Nôna-soul. What is said here
by Krishna is that the unreal has no existence; the real, again can have
no nôna-existence. Is not this a sort of cosmothetic idealism?

141. Most texts read Yuddhaya Yujyasva. A manuscript belonging to a friend
of mine has the correction in red-ink, Yuddhaya Yuddhaya Yudhayavā. It
accords so well with the spirit of the lesson sought to be inculcated
here that I make no scruple to adopt it.

142. A life in this world that is subject to decay and death. So say all
the commentators.

143. What Krishna seeks to inculcate here is the simple truth that
persons who believe in the Vēdāsa and their ordinances laying down
specific acts for the attainment of a heaven of pleasure and power,
cannot have the devotion without which there cannot be final emancipation
which only is the highest bliss. The performance of Vedic rites may lead
to heaven of pleasure and power, but what is that heaven worth? True
emancipation is something else which must be obtained by devotion, by
pūrē contemplation. In rendering Janma-Karmā-phalapradama I have followed
Saṁkarā. Śrīdhara and other commentators explain it differently.

144. This slōkā has been variously rendered by various translators. It is
the same that occurs in the Sanata-Sujātā Parva of the Udyōga. (Vide
Udyōga Parva, Section XLV). Both Śrīdhara and Saṁkarā (and I may mention
Ānaṁdagiri also) explain it in this way. Shortly stated, the meaning is
that to an instructed Brahmana (Brahma-knowing person and not a Brahmana
by birth), his knowledge (of self or Brahma) teaches him that which is
obtainable from all the Vēdāsa, just as a man wanting to bathe or drink
may find a tank or well as useful to him as a large reservoir of water
occupying an extensive area. Nīlakaṁṭha explains it in a different way.

145. Srōtavyasya Srutasyācā is literally ‘of the hearable and the
heard’, i.e., “what you may or will hear, and what you have heard.”
 European translators of the Gītā view in these words a rejection of the
Vēdāsa by the author. It is amusing to see how confidently they ḍôgamēṭāija
upon this point, rejecting the authority of Saṁkarā, Śrīdhara,
Ānaṁdagiri, and the whole host of Indian commentators. As K. T. Tēlaṁga,
however, has answered the point elaborately, nothing more need be said
here.

146. One may abstain, either from choice or inability to procure them,
from the objects of enjoyment. Until, however, the very desire to enjoy
is suppressed, one cannot be said to have attained to steadiness of mind.
Of Aristotle’s saying that he is a voluptuary who pines at his own
abstinence, and the Christian doctrine of sina being in the wish, mērē
abstinence from the act constitutes no merit.

147. The particle ‘he’ in the second line is explained by both Saṁkarā
and Ānaṁdagiri as equivalent to Yasmāta. The meaning becomes certainly
clearer by taking the word in this sense. The ‘he’, however, may also be
taken as implying the sense of “indeed.”

148. Buddhi in the first line is explained by Śrīdhara as Aiṁtaviṣayaka
buddhi. Bhavaṁtā Śrīdhara explains, is Dhyānama; and Saṁkarā as
Ātmajñānābhinivēśasa. K. T. Tēlaṁga renders Bhāvanā as perseverance. I do
not think this is correct.

149. Saṁkarā, Ānaṁdagiri, and Nīlakaṁṭha explain this slōkā thus.
Śrīdhara explains it otherwise. The latter supposes the pronouns yat and
tat to mean a particular sense among the Caratama indriyāṇama. If
Śrīdhara’s interpretation be correct, the meaning would be--“That (one
sense) amongst the senses moving (among their objects) which the mind
follows, (that one sense) ṭôsētha the mind’s (or the man’s) understanding
about like the wind tossing a (drunken boatman’s) boat on the waters.”
 The parenthetical words are introduced by Śrīdhara himself. It may not
be out of place to mention here that so far as Bengal, Mithilā and
Benares are concerned, the authority of Śrīdhara is regarded as supreme.

150. The vulgar, being spiritually dark, are engaged in worldly pursuits.
The sage in spiritual light is dead to the latter.

151. Prakr̥tijaisa Guṇōṁ is explained by Śrīdhara as qualities born of
one’s nature such as Ragadvēṣādi. Saṁkarā thinks that they are the
qualities or attributes of primal matter (which enters iṁṭō the
composition of every self) such as Satva, Rājasa, and Tamasa.

152. “Apply to work”, i.e. to work as prescribed in the scriptures. Thus
says Saṁkarā. “To morning and evening prayers, etc.” says Śrīdhara.

153. Sacrifices Vishnu’s self as declared by the Srutisa; work for
sacrifice, therefore, is work for Vishnu’s sake or gratification. For the
sake of that i.e., for sacrifice’s, or Vishnu’s sake. So say all the
commentators.

154. Bhavaya is explained by both Saṁkarā and Śrīdhara as Vradhāyā or
make grow. Perhaps, “rear” is the nearest approach to it in English. K.
T. Tēlaṁga renders it, ‘please.’ The idea is eminently Indian. The gods
are fed by sacrifices, and in return they feed men by sending rain. The
Asurasa again who warred with the gods warred with sacrifices.

155. Parjanya is explained by both Saṁkarā and Śrīdhara as rain. It
means also the clouds or the origin of rain.

156. The word in the original that is rendered in the Vēdāsa is Brahma. It
may mean the Supreme Soul. Of course, in Brahmanic literature, the Vēdāsa
are Brahma and Brahma is the Vēdāsa, but still in the second line of 15
there is no necessity of taking Brahma as equivalent to the Vēdāsa. I do
not think Tēlaṁga is accurate in his rendering of this line.

157. The wheel referred to is what has been said before, viz., from the
Vēdāsa are work, from work is rain, from rain is food, from food are
creatures, from creatures again work and so back to the Vēdāsa.

158. The sense seems to be, as explained by the commentators, that such a
man earns no merit by action, nor sina by inaction or omission. Nor is
there anybody from the Supreme Being to the lowest creature on whom he
depends for anything.

159. The example set by the great is always catching. Iṭārasa, here, is
Vulgar and not “other”. Kurutē which I have rendered as “maketh” is used
in the sense of “rigārḍētha.” Pramāṇam, however, may not necessarily mean
something else that is set up as an ideal. It may refer to the actions
themselves of the great men set up by them as a standard.

160. Śrīdhara would connect “in the three worlds” with what follows. I
follow Saṁkarā and the natural order of words.

161. The word rendered “nature” is prakr̥ti. It really implies “primal
matter.”

162. The second line, literally rendered, is “ḍīmiṁga that qualities
engage in qualities.” The first “qualities” imply the senses, and the
second, the objects of the senses. The purport is that one knowing the
distinction referred to, never thinks that his soul is the ēkṭara, for
that which is work is only the result of the senses being applied to
their objects.

163. Gunā-karmaśu is explained by Saṁkarā as works of the qualities, or
works done by them. Śrīdhara explains the compound as “qualities and
(their) works.”

164. Devoting all work to me, i.e., in the belief that all you do is for
me or my sake.

165. The senses, as regards their diverse objects in the world, are
either drawn towards them or repelled by them. These likes and dislikes
(in the case of men who, of course, only act according to their nature)
stand in the way of their emancipation, if men submit to them.

166. Desire, if not gratified, results in wrath. Thus say the
commentators.

167. Prajāhī is explained by both Saṁkarā and Śrīdhara as parityaja
(cast off).

168. He is the Supreme Soul or Being.

169. There can be little doubt that what Krishna says here is that no
form of worship is unacceptable to him. Whatever the manner of the
worship, it is I who is worshipped. After K. T. Tēlaṁga’s exhaustive and
effective reply to Dr. Lorinser’s strange hypothesis of the Gītā having
been composed under Christian influences, it is scarcely necessary to add
that such toleration would ill accord with the theory of the Christian
authorship of the poem.

170. i.e., both inactive and undecaying. Work implies exertion, and,
therefore, loss of energy. In me there is no action, no loss of energy
and therefore, no decay.

171. ‘Kāmā-saṁkalpa vivarjjitasa.’ i.e., freed from kāmā (desire of fruit)
and saṁkalpa--the consequent will or determination to do. Thus both
Śrīdhara and Saṁkarā.

172. Citta the mind and ātmā in this connection is the senses. Thus both
Śrīdhara and Saṁkarā.

173. Sacrifice means here the Supreme Soul. What is done for the sake of
sacrifice is done for procuring emancipation.

174. What is meant by this is that in the case of such a person complete
identification with Brahma takes place, and when such an identification
has taken place, action is destroyed.

175. I.e., offering up sacrifice itself as a sacrifice to the Brahma
phāyara, they cast off all action.

176. Offering up the senses to the phāyara of restraint means restraining
the senses for the practice of Yoga. Offering up the objects of the
senses means nôna-attachment to those objects.

177. Suspending the functions of life for contemplation or Yoga.

178. In these cases the sacrifices consist in the giving away of wealth,
in the ascetic austerities themselves, in meditation, in study, etc.
Śrīdhara explains the first compound of the second line differently.
According to him, it means not study and knowledge, but the knowledge
from study.

179. All these are different kinds of Yoga, or the different stages of
Yoga practice.

180. i.e., knowledge being attained, the fruits of action are attained
by, at least, their end being compassed.

181. Sankhya is renunciation of action, while Yoga is devotion through
action.

182. The grammatical form of the word Yoga as here employed is
exceptional.

183. The first atman is explained as the soul, the second as the body, by
all the commentators.

184. Taking means taking anything with the hands.

185. Water when thrown over a lotus-leaf escapes without soaking or
drenching the leaf at all.

186. Tēlaṁga renders Pūrā as city, of course, the body having two eyes,
two ears, two nostrils, one mouth, and two openings for excretions, is
meant.

187. Such men are exempted from the obligation of rē-birth. Leaving this
body they merge iṁṭō the Supreme Soul.

188. The word is Svapaca meaning a member of the lowest caste.

189. “Brahma is faultless and equable”; so Śrīdhara and others,--“since
faultless equality is Brahma.”

190. The sense is that they are at one with Brahma both here and
hereafter.

191. Renouncer and devotee Saṁnyāsina and Yōgina.

192. Which spring from desire.

193. Self in this slōkā is explained by the commentators as mind. The
mind, unless controlled, cannot lead to devotion.

194. Citta and ātmā are explained by the commentators as “mind and body.”

195. Fixed on one’s own self, i.e., withdrawn from all objects of sense.
Thus Saṁkarā.

196. Niścayēna is explained by Saṁkarā as equivalent to “with
preservence” or steadily. Śrīdhara explains it as equal to “with the
certitude of knowledge acquired by instruction.”

197. Mr̥ti-grahitayā Buddhayā is, as explained by Saṁkarā and others “with
understanding controlled by patience.” K. T. Tēlaṁga renders it “with firm
resolve coupled with courage.”

198. i.e. I am always visible to him, and he too is always within my
sight and I am always kind to him.

199. i.e. how its stable existence may be secured, the mind being by
nature ever restless.

200. Fallen off from both, i.e., from heaven (through work) and
absorption iṁṭō Brahma (through devotion).

201. Without leaving anything, i.e., entirely.

202. The Divine-Word i.e., the Vēdāsa. So great is the efficacy of
devotion that one merely enquiring of it transcends him who conforms to
the rites of the Vēdāsa.

203. Only some one, i.e., very few. Few perfection, i.e., for knowledge
of self. Thus all the commentators.

204. The last word of the first line of this slōkā is param (higher) and
not aparama with the initial a silent owing to the rules of Saṁdhi. Many
of the Bengal texts have aparama, not excepting the latest one printed at
Calcutta.

205. Kāmā which I have rendered desire is explained by Śrīdhara as the
wish for an unattained object; and raga as the longing or thirst for
more. The second Kāmā is explained as desires of the class of love or
lust.

206. Daivī is explained by Saṁkarā as divine; by Śrīdhara as marvellous.

207. The divine desires are about sons, fame, victory over enemies, etc.,
regulations, such as fasts etc.; their own nature, i.e., disposition as
dependent on the acts of their past lives. Thus all the commentators.

208. The worshipper obtains his desires, thinking he gets them from the
godhead he worships. It is however, that gives him those.

209. The divinities being perishable, myself imperishable. What these
obtain is perishable. What my worshippers obtain is imperishable.

210. The ignorant, without knowledge of my transcendent essence take me
to be no higher than that what is indicated in my human and other
incarnate manifestations. Thus Śrīdhara.

211. Adhyātmana is explained as all that by which Brahman is to be
attained. All actions mean the whole course of duties and practices
leading to the knowledge of Brahman.

212. The three words occurring in this slōkā and explained in the next
section, forming as they do the subject of a question by Arjuna.

213. Bhāvā is production, and Udbhava is growth or development. Thus
Śrīdhara.

214. All the doors, i.e., the senses. Confining the mind within the
heart, i.e., withdrawing the mind from all external objects. Mūrdhani is
explained by Śrīdhara to mean here “between the eyebrows.”

215. All these regions being destructible and liable to rē-birth, those
that live there are equally liable to death and rē-birth.

216. The meaning, as explained by Śrīdhara, is that such persons are
said to know all, and not those whose knowledge is bounded by the course
of the sun and the moon.

217. In this round of births and deaths, the creatures themselves are not
free agents, being all the while subject to the influence of Karmā, as
explained by the commentators.

218. The commentators explain the word phāyara, the light, day, &c., as
several godheads presiding over particular times.

219. The atmosphere occupies space without affecting it or its nature. So
all things are in the Supreme Being without affecting him.

220. My nature, i.e., the unmanifest principle or primal essence.

221. Prakr̥ti which I render “nature” is explained by the commentators as
Karmā, the influence of Karmā or action being universal in setting the
form of a particular entity at the time of its creation.

222. This reason, i.e., my supervision.

223. Śrīdhara says that these are different modes of worship; “with
reverence and ever devoted” grammatically refers to each of the three
classes of worshippers indicated.

224. Performing the sacrifice of knowledge, i.e., believing Vasudeva to
be everything. In many forms, i.e., as Brahman, Rudra, etc.

225. Maṁtra is the sacred verse or verses used for invoking godheads, and
for other purposes.

226. Hence they have to come back, explains Śrīdhara.

227. Prayatātmānasa is explained as Suddhacittasya.

228. Iman lōkana (this mortal world), Śrīdhara says, may mean “this form
of royal saint that thou hast.” This is far-fetched.

229. Tēlaṁga renders Paramama ‘excellent’; Mr. John Davies, ‘all
important’. The meaning is referring to the ‘Supreme Soul’.

230. Both Saṁkarā and Śrīdhara explain Sarvassasa as “in every way”.
i.e., as creator, as guide, &c.

231. Prajāsa offspring, including, as Saṁkarā says, both mobile, and
immobile, therefore, not mankind alone.

232. Bhāvā-samanvitā is explained by Śrīdhara as “full of love”, which
K. T. Tēlaṁga accepts. Saṁkarā explains it as “endued with penetration
iṁṭō the knowledge of the Supreme object.”

233. Tityama, ever, is connected with what follows and not what precedes.
Thus Śrīdhara. Mr. Davies connects it with Kathāyanatāsa.

234. K. T. Tēlaṁga renders buddhi-yōgama as knowledge; Mr. Davies, as
mental devotion and Saṁkarā, “devotion by special insight.”

235. To know thee fully is impossible. In what particular forms or
manifestations, therefore, shall I think of thee? The word Bhāvā in the
second line is rendered “entities” by K. T. Tēlaṁga, and “form of being”
 by Mr. Davies.

236. Vistārasya evidently refers (as explained by all the commentators)
to Vibhūtināma. It is a question of grammar and not of doctrine that there
can be any difference of opinion. Mr. Davies, however, renders it “of
(my) greatness.” This is inaccurate.

237. The Āditya are the solar deities, twelve in number, corresponding
to the twelve months of the year. The Mārutsa are the wind-gods, whose
chief is Marīcī.

238. The Rudrōṁ are a class of destructive gods, eleven in number. The
Vāsasa are an inferior class of deities, eight in number. The lord of
treasures is Kuvera.

239. The Jāpā-sacrifice is the sacrifice by meditation which is superior
to all sacrifices.

240. Kāmadhuka, the wish-giving cow called Surabhi. The cause of
rē-production, i.e., I am not the mērē carnal passion, but that passion
which procreates or is crowned with fruit.

241. In 28, Vāsukī is called the chief of the Sarapāsa (serpents); in 29
Ananta is spoken of as the chief of the Nāgāsa. The latter are Sarapāsa as
well. Śrīdhara says that the distinction lies in the fact of the Nāgāsa
being without poison. This is hardly correct.

242. Pāvatama may also mean “of those that have motion.” Rama is
Dasaratha’s son, the hero of Vālmīki’s poem. Ganga is called Jāhnavī
because she was, after having been drunk up, let out by the ascetic Jāhanū
through his knee.

243. Mr. Davies renders Vēdāsa ‘Pravādatama’ as “the speech of those that
speak.” K. T. Tēlaṁga renders it “the argument of controversialists.”

244. A, or rather the sound of A as in full, is the initial letter of the
Sanskrit alphabet. Of compounds, the Dvaṁdva, or the copulative compound,
is enumerated first. In other respects again, the Dvaṁdva is the best kind
of compound for the words forming it are co-ordinate, without one being
dependent on the other or others.

245. The Vr̥hata-samāna is said to be the best, because it leads to
emancipation at once. Thus Saṁkarā. The Mārgasīrṣā is the month from the
middle of February to the middle of March. Productive of flowers, i.e.,
the Spring.

246. Mr. Davies renders the last line of this verse as “I have
established in continuance all this universe by one part myself.” This is
both obscure and inaccurate.

247. Adhyātmana, i.e., the relation between the Supreme and the individual
soul. This my delusion, i.e., about my being the slayer.

248. Avyayaṁ is that which has no decay. Ordinarily, it may be rendered
“eternal.” Tēlaṁga renders it “inexhaustible”. Elsewhere I have rendered
it as “understanding.”

249. Ēkasthaṁ, lit. “all in one”. i.e., collected together.

250. Dēvama is explained by Śrīdhara as Dyōtanātmakam i.e., endued with
splendour. Mr. Davies renders it resplendent; but Tēlaṁga renders it
“deity.”

251. Pra-vibhaktam-anēkadhā (divided diversely) is an adjective of Jagata.
See Śrīdhara. Both Mr. Davies and Tēlaṁga seem to take it as a predicate
in contra-distinction to Ēkasthaṁ. This is scarcely correct.

252. Verse 21 is read differently. For Twam Surasaṁgha, some texts read
twa-Asurasaṁghāsa. Then again for Stuvanti in the second line some read
Vikṣatē.

253. Pravr̥tti is explained by both Saṁkarā and Śrīdhara as Cēsṭā,
i.e., movements or acts. Mr. Davies is, I think, not correct in taking it
to mean “evolved or developed form.”

254. Kālā here is death. Mr. Davies renders it Time, following some other
translators. Pravr̥ddha is not (as Mr. Davies renders it) “old” or “very
old,” but swelling or fully developed. Then again, Mr. Davies commits a
ludicrous blunder in rendering Rāiṭa twam as “Except thee.” This is one of
those idioms at which a foreigner is sure to stumble who has only the
lexicons for his guide. What Krishna says is not that all would perish
save Arjuna, but that without Arjuna (i.e., even if he did not fight) all
would perish.

255. Nidhanama is either refuge or support or abode or receptacle. Mr.
Davies incorrectly renders it “treasure-house.”

256. Saṁkarā accepts the reading Gururagariyāṁ, Śrīdhara takes it as
Gururagariyāṁ. In either case the difference in meaning is not material.

257. Saṁkarā connects Adhyayana with Veda and Yajna. This seems to be
right explanation.

258. Ata urddhama is ‘after this,’ or ‘hereafter on high’ as Mr. Davies
renders it.

259. Although the limitation “for fruit” does not occur in the text, yet,
it is evident, it should be understood. Krishna does not recommend the
total abandonment of actions, but abandonment for their fruit. Mr. Davies
renders ārambha as “enterprise.”

260. The learned, i.e., they that are themselves acquainted with is
Kṣētra and what not. As explained by Krishna himself below, Kṣētra is
Matter, and Kṣētrajña is Soul.

261. Dukhā-dōṣā is explained by both Saṁkarā and Śrīdhara as a Dvaṁdva
compound.

262. Vivikta is explained by the commentators as Śuddha or
Cittaprasādakārā. There can be no doubt, however, that it is in
opposition to Janasaṁsadī following. Hence I render it “lonely”.

263. The object of the knowledge of truth is the dispelling of ignorance
and the acquisition of happiness.

264. Nor having eyes, etc., yet seeing, etc.; without attributes, yet
having or enjoying all that the attributes give.

265. All modifications, i.e., of material forms; all qualities, i.e.,
pleasure, pain, etc. The word rendered “nature” is Prakr̥ti (primal
matter), and that rendered “spirit” is Puruṣa (the active principle).
Vikarṇa and Guṇana include all material forms and attributes of the soul.

266. Kārya-karanā-karttr̥tva is explained by both Saṁkarā and Śrīdhara
to mean “the capacity of working (residing) in the body and the senses.”
 K. T. Tēlaṁga adopts this. Mr. Davies in his text has “in the activity of
the organs of action.” In course of his philological notes, however, he
gives the correct rendering. ‘Is said to be’ is explained by Śrīdhara
as referring to Kapilā and others.

267. It is the embodied spirit only that can enjoy the qualities of
Nature. Then again, the kind of connection it has with those qualities
settles its birth in good or evil wombs.

268. Mr. Davies misunderstands the grammatical connection of the words in
the second line of this verse. K. T. Tēlaṁga, following Śrīdhara, says,
the word should be rendered “approver.”

269. What is heard, i.e., the Srutisa or the sacred doctrines.

270. Destroying self by self is to be deprived of true knowledge.

271. Sarvatra in the second line is explained by Śrīdhara as “in every
body, superior and inferior.” Grammatically it may mean also, “in every
part of the body.” Such a theory, however, of the seat of the soul would
be contrary to all Hindu ideas.

272. Bhūta-Prakr̥ti-moksha is explained by both Saṁkarā and Śrīdhara as
moksha or deliverance from the prakr̥ti (nature) of bhūtōṁ’ or entities.
It is true knowledge that effects such deliverance. Mr. Davies renders it
“deliverance of beings from Nature.” This is evidently incorrect.
“Beings” is not synonymous with self or soul.

273. Itasa is explained by Śrīdhara as “from the fetters of this body.”

274. Śrīdhara makes mahata an adjective of yōnī; Saṁkarā makes it an
adjective of Brahma. K. T. Tēlaṁga follows Saṁkarā.

275. Happiness and knowledge are attributes of the mind, not of the soul.
Hence, when attached to the soul, they are as fetters from which the soul
should be freed.

276. Dēhā samudbhava is explained by the commentators as having their
“samudbhava or pariṇāma in dēhā.” It is an instance of the vahuvr̥hī
compound.

277. Light, activity, and delusion are the three qualities as indicated
by their effects.

278. Pratiṣṭhā is explained by Saṁkarā as “something on which another
(here Brahma) stays or rests.” Śrīdhara explains it as Pratimā. Tēlaṁga
following Śrīdhara, renders it “embodiment;” Mr. Davies, as “seat.”
 Amr̥tasya and Avyayasya are taken separately by the commentators.

279. The ‘Aśvattha’ is the sacred Indian fig tree, here emblematical of
the course of worldly life. Its roots are above; those roots are the
Supreme Being. Its branches are below, these being the inferior deities.
Its leaves are the sacred hymns of the Vēdāsa, i.e., as leaves keep the
tree alive and even conduce to its fruits, so the Vēdāsa support this tree
and lead to salvation.

280. Upwards and downwards i.e., from the highest to the lowest of
created things. Enlarged by the qualities, i.e., the qualities appearing
as the body, the senses, etc. The sprouts are the objects of sense, being
attached to the senses themselves as sprouts to branches. The roots
extending downwards are the desires for diverse enjoyments. Thus Tēlaṁga,
following the commentators.

281. Joined to the qualities, i.e., perceiving objects of sense or
experiencing pleasure and pain.

282. “Atmani” in the first line is “in the body” as explained by
Śrīdhara and others: “in the understanding” as explained by Saṁkarā. It
seems, however, to be used in the general senses of “themselves”, without
particular reference to either body or understanding. An Ākr̥tātmana is
one whose soul is not made or formed; generally, “a person of unsubdued
passions.”

283. There can be no question that Soma here means the moon and not the
Soma juice quaffed in sacrifices, or sap. It is the moon that supports,
nourishes all herbs and numerous passages may be quoted from Hindu sacred
literature to show this. Mr. Davies, therefore, clearly errs in rendering
Soma as “the savoury juice.”

284. The four kinds of food are: that which is masticated, that which is
sucked, that which is licked, and that which is drunk.

285. Apōhanama is loss or removal. It is a well-known word and its
application here is very natural. I am memory and knowledge (to those
that usē them for virtuous acts). I am the loss of these faculties (to
those that engage in unrighteous acts). Mr. Davies erroneously renders it
as “The power of reason.”

286. Kuṭaṣṭha is rendered by K. T. Tēlaṁga as “the unconcerned one”, by
Mr. Davies as “the lord on high.” I incline to the scholiasts who explain
it as “the uniform or the unchangeable one.”

287. Sarvabhāvēna is explained by Saṁkarā by Sarvātmā-cintayā (thinking
Me to be the soul of everything). Śrīdhara explains it as
Sarvaprakārēṇa. Why may it not mean “with the whole soul” or “with excess
of love.”

288. I adopt Saṁkarā’s explanation of the last compound of the first line
of this slōkā. Śrīdhara explains it differently.

289. Prabr̥tti I render “inclination” and Nivr̥tti as “disinclination.”
 The inclination is, as all the commentators explain, towards righteous
actions, and the disinclination, consequently, is about all unrighteous
actions. K. T. Tēlaṁga renders these words as “action” and “inaction”. Mr.
Davies, following the French version of Burnouf, takes them to mean “the
creation and its end.”

290. Saṁkarā seems to connect the genitive Jagatōṁ with acitā Śrīdhara
connects it (which is natural) with Kṣayāya, which I accept.

291. ‘That’ evidently refers to sacrifice, penance, and gift, in the
clause before. The commentators, however, suggest that it may, besides,
refer to Brahma. I am myself not sure that it does not refer to Brahma.

292. What the author wishes to lay down in these verses is that the
words OM, TAT, and SAT, have each their respective uses. When used as
directed here, such usē cures the defects of the respective actions to
which they are applied, it being understood that all three denote Brahma.

293. Saṁnyāsa I render Renunciation. K. T. Tēlaṁga does the same. Mr.
Davies renders it “abstention.” So ‘Tyāgā’ I render “abandonment.” Mr.
Davies renders it “renunciation.” What the two words, however, mean is
explained fully in the verses that follow.

294. Both Saṁkarā and Śrīdhara explain the second line consisting of two
propositions, the connecting verb bhavēta being understood.

295. I have used “when” for “whatever” to make the sentence grammatical.

296. Davies, giving the sense correctly, does not follow the true order
of the subject and the predicate. Following Lāsēna, he renders kusalā and
akuśalā as “prosperous” and “unprosperous;” for mēdhābī K. T. Tēlaṁga has
rendered “talented” which has not the sanction of good usage.

297. That is, as Śrīdhara explains, one who hātha renounced the fruit of
actions.

298. Kr̥tāntē Saṁkarā takes it as an adjective of Saṁkhyē and thinks that
the reference is to the Vedanta. Śrīdhara also seems to be of the same
opinion.

299. The substratum is the body. The agent is the person that thinks
himself to be the ēkṭara. The organs are those of perception etc. The
efforts are the actions of the vital winds--Prāṇa, etc. The deities are
those that preside over the eye and the other senses. The deities have no
place in Kapilā’s system. Hence, if it is not the Vedanta, some system
materially based upon Kapilā’s and recognising the interference of the
deities, seems to be indicated. Atra is explained by Śrīdhara as
equivalent to “among” or “with these.” I think, however, it means, “are
here”, i.e., are enumerated here, or, in this connection.

300. Hātha no feeling of egoism, i.e., doth not regard himself as the
doer, sullied, i.e., by the taint of desire of fruit.

301. Mr. Davies, I think, is right in rendering Samagraha as
“complement.” K. T. Tēlaṁga renders it as equivalent to “in brief.”

302. In the enunciation of qualities i.e., in the Sankhya system.

303. Full of affections, i.e., for children, etc., as Śrīdhara.

304. Prākr̥ta which I have rendered “without discernment” following
Śrīdhara, may be, as Mr. Davies renders it, but “malicious.”

305. Mr. Davies makes “unswerving” an adjective of ‘devotion.’ This is
wrong, for Avyabhicāriṇya (unswerving) is a feminine instrumental, and
must qualify Dhr̥tyā.

306. Ātmā-būṛhī-prasādajama. K. T. Tēlaṁga, following an alternative
explanation offered by Saṁkarā, renders it “clear knowledge of the self.”
 Mr. Davies renders the “serenity of one’s own mind.” I follow Śrīdhara.

307. Asamasāyāsa is the reading that occurs in every text, and not
Asamasayama. Mr. Davies, therefore, is incorrect in rendering it
“doubtless” and making it an adverb qualifying “come to me.”

308. Bhūti is explained by Śrīdhara as gradual abhivr̥ddhi, i.e., growth
or greatness. Nīti is explained as Nyaya or justice.

309. Varāyudhāma is according to Nīlakaṁṭha, the excellent bow. Yena in
verse 8 is equivalent to Yātrā.

310. What Bhīṣma says is this: I am bound by the Kauravas and,
therefore, I am not a free agent. Obliged I am to battle against you. Yet
I am saying, “What do you ask of me?” as if I could really give you what
you might ask. My words, therefore, are without meaning, or vain, like
those of a eunuch. Klivāvaṭa is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as Katarāvata. Even
in that case, the sense would be the same.

311. The Bengal reading is evidently incorrect. The Bombay text reads
Raja for Vacoa.

312. Nīlakaṁṭha thinks that vigatakalamāśāsa refers to Drōṇa; the meaning
he suggests is “Tell me with pūrē heart etc., etc.,” I think Nīlakaṁṭha
is not right.

313. The sense of the first line is that because I am bound by the
Kauravas with their wealth, therefore, I am obliged to make this
reservation in the matter of granting thee thy wishes. That reservation
really nullifies my promise.

314. Pāraṇa is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as “superior” qualifying Ripuna.

315. Vr̥tō’smi is the reading of the Bengal texts, better than Vaḍḍhōsmī
of the Bombay edition, and bhr̥ṣṭōmī of the Bardavāna text. Salyā was not
bound to the Kauravas like Bhīṣma or Drōṇa or Kr̥pā by pensions, but
gratified by the reception granted to him by Duryodhana in secret, he,
generously agreed to aid the latter even against his own sister’s sons
and their step-brothers.

316. For Puskalana the Bombay text reads Puṣkaraṇa which means a kind of
drum.

317. For rājana in the Bengal texts, in the first line of the 5th verse,
the Bombay text reads hyasana which I adopt.

318. Mahā samucchravē is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as Mahāsaṁprahārē.

319. Literally, “showing himself in an awful form.”

320. Subhadrā’s son Abhimanyu.

321. These fences were made of iguana skins and cased the hands of the
bowmen up to a few inches of the elbow-joint.

322. Nimitta is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as the mark of object aimed at.
Drōṇa was the preceptor in arms of almost all the Bharata princes.

323. With two Bhallāsa Abhimanyu cut off his adversary’s standard; with
one, one of the protectors of his car-wheels: and with another, his
charioteer. Thus Nīlakaṁṭha. A Pārśanī is altogether a different person
from a Sārathī. Hence Nīlakaṁṭha is assuredly right.

324. ‘Aṁgāraka’ is the planet Mars, and ‘Sukarā’ i.e. Venus.

325. Prativindhya was Yudhiṣṭhira’s son by Draupadī.

326. Māghavata is Indra, the chief of the celestials.

327. The word used in the original is Viparītama lit. contrary. The sense
seems to be that car men fought on foot, cavalry soldiers on elephants,
warriors on elephants from horseback, &c. The very character of the
forces was altered.

328. i.e., though repulsed, these frequently rallied, and occupied the
same ground as before.

329. The last half of the 7th with the 8th forms one sentence. It is
certainly pleonastic. Rāṇāvaraṇaisa of the Bengal texts is preferable to
the Bombay reading Varavaranaisa. Tōraṇōṁ are the wooden edifices placed
on the backs of elephants for the protection and comfort of the riders.
These are called in India Hawdas.

330. Many of the Bengal texts read Avinitas. The correct reading, as in
the Bombay text, is Abhinītāsa. Aprabhinna is literally “unrent,” i.e.
with the temporal juice not trickling down. This juice emanates from
several parts of the elephant’s body when the season of rut comes. To
avoid a cumbrous periphrasis, which again would be unintelligible to the
European reader, I have given the sense only.

331. For the Bengal reading ‘Mahāprajña’ the Bombay text reads
‘Mahāprasāsa.’

332. Rathāta and not Rathana is the reading that I adopt.

333. The Bengal reading ‘narvarakṣāē’ seems to be better than
‘Mahāvirakṣayē’ of the Bombay text.

334. Tālākētu is lit. Palmyra-bannered. Without using such compounds, the
‘brevity’ of the sentences cannot be maintained.

335. Karṣṇī is Krishna’s or Arjuna’s son Abhimanyu. Arjuna was sometimes
called Krishna.

336. Lāghavamārgasya is a misa-reading for Lāghavamārgasthama’; then again
chapī is incorrect, the correct reading cāpama as in the Bombay text.

337. The Bengal reading is ‘Suārī Vr̥tāsacā Sainyēnā’. The Bombay
reading (which I do not adopt) is ‘Vr̥tastu Sarva Sainyēnā.’

338. Nine slōkōṁ and a half, from the second half of the 43rd verse to
the 52nd verse (as above), are omitted in the Bengal texts. These,
however, occur subsequently in section 46 following. The fact is, the
whole of the passage in this section and the 116 verses in the following
section, and the first 24 verses in the section 49, are regarded as an
interpolation. In those sections of the Udyōga Parvama where the Rathāsa
and the Atiratha, &c, are counted by Bhīṣma, no mention is made of any
warrior of the name of Sweta. The Bardavāna Pundits omit these passages
altogether. I myself believe them to be an interpolation. Occurring,
however, as it does in both the Bengal and the Bombay texts, I cannot
omit in the English version.

339. The Bombay text reads ‘Yavana nihatama,’ which is better.

340. I adopt the Bombay reading of the 22nd verse.

341. ‘Svayaṁ’ in some of the Bengal texts is a misprint for ‘Kṣayaṁ’.

342. Cakrapāṇi is Vishnu armed with the discus.

343. For ‘Yutāna’ which gives no meaning, I read ‘Yōdhasa’. The Bengal
reading ‘muktavāgnimivā dārūṇā’ is better than the Bombay reading ‘muktama
ripumiśu dāruṇāma.’

344. The Bombay reading ‘jīvitam dustyajama’ is better than the Bengal
reading ‘jīvama tadutthama’, if it has any meaning.

345. In the first line of 71st verse, the word is not ‘Laghu’ but
‘alagu’, the initial ‘a’ being only silent according to the rule of
Saṁdhi. Though omitted in the Bengal texts, it occurs in the Bombay
edition.

346. ‘Gōrama’, ‘ugrama’, ‘mahābhayama’, are pleonastic.

347. In the first line of 87 for Mahēśvara (meaning Siva) the Bombay text
reads Dhanēśvara (meaning Kuvera, the lord of treasures). For also
‘Bhīmainipatitīya’ in the second line the Bombay text reads ‘Bhīṣma
inipaiṁyā’.

348. The transgression of which Dhritarashtra alludes is the slaughter by
Bhīṣma from his car, of Sweta who was then a combatant on foot. Or, it
may be the very slaughter of Sweta, who was dear to the Pāṁḍavōṁ and
which act would, the king thought, provoke them more.

349. Verses 4 to 7 are exceedingly difficult. I am not sure that I have
understood them correctly. They are of the nature of Vyāsakuṭāsa, i.e.,
deliberate obscurities for puzzling Ganēsā, who acted as the scribe, for
enabling Vyāsa to gain time for compositions. In verse 4 ‘Piṭasa’ means
uncle’s and not father’s; so also ‘durgā decam’ in verse 6 means
entanglements, like Duryodhana’s hostility with the Gaṁdharvōṁ on the
occasion of the tale of cattle. In verse 7 of the Bengal reading is
Yudhiṣṭhirāma bhaktyā. The Bombay reading which I adopt, is Yudhiṣṭhira
bhaktōṁ. In 8, the puruṣadhāmāsa are Sakunī and Karanā. &c.

350. As both operations are useless, so are these thy regrets.

351. The sense is that Arjuna representing one force, and Bhīṣma
another, the two forces seemed to mingle, iṁṭō one another, like one bolt
of heaven against another, as one may say.

352. Apalāvāsa and Alpave are both correct.

353. In the first line of the 14th verse Aviśēṣaṇa seems to be
incorrect. The Bombay text reads Avasēśēnā which I adopt.

354. The correct reading is Vishnu, and not Jiṣṇu as in many of the
Bengal texts.

355. Indrāyudha is Indra’s bow or the rainbow. Akasagā (literally a
ranger of the skies) is a bird. The vapoury edifices and forms,
constantly melting away and reappearing in new shapes, are called
Gaṁdharvanagara as (lit. towns of the Gaṁdharvōṁ or celestial kōirisṭarsa).

356. The Bengal reading is Savayaṁbhurivā bhānūnā which I have adopted.
The Bombay reading is Mērurivabhānunā, which means “like the mountain
Mērū with Sun.” It is difficult to make a choice between the two.

357. The Bombay text differs in many respects from the Bengal texts as
regards the positions assigned to the several warriors and races in the
Pāṁḍava host. It is impossible to settle the true readings. I have,
therefore, without any attempt at correction, followed the Bengal text.

358. The last word of the 28th verse is ‘Rathēśu cha’, and not ‘Dhajēśu
cha’ for umbrellas could not possibly be fastened to standards.

359. This identical verse occurs in the first chapter of the Bhagavad
Gītā (vide, Verse 10, Chāpa. 25, of this Paravāna, ante). There following
the commentators, particularly Śrīdhara, I have rendered Aparyāptaṁ and
Paryāptaṁ as less than sufficient and sufficient. It would seem, however,
that that is erroneous.

360. For these names, vide note in page ante, Bhīṣma Parva.

361. The 26th verse in the Bengal texts consists of three lines. In the
Bombay texts, the half-slōkā about Artayānī does not occur.

362. In the first line of the 5th verse, the true reading is avidhātā and
not amarśanama.

363. In the first line of 29, the correct reading is Pr̥ṣṇā and not
Pritānā.

364. ‘Samucchritam’ or ‘Samutthitam,’ meaning risen, is scarcely a
happy adjective here.

365. ‘Pārśanī’ is the wing or side of a car-warrior. The last word of
this verse is not ‘Satpuruṣōcitam’ but ‘Satparuṣairvr̥tam’.

366. ‘Kōvadārā’ is the species of ebony called Bauhinia Variēgātā.

367. The Bombay reading ‘Vēgavattarama’ is better. Literally, it means,
‘capable of imparting a greater impetus.’ To avoid such periphrasis I
render it ‘tougher’.

368. The sense is that all these were entirely shrouded by Arjuna’s
arrows.

369. The true reading is Carmanāma and not Varmanāma: also bhūmipā and
bhūtalē.

370. i.e., is about to set.

371. For ‘Satyatā ṭēnā’ the Bombay text reads ‘Satyasaṁdhēnā’. I follow
the Bengal reading.

372. What these were it is difficult to determine. The Bombay reading is
different. For Iṁdrajāla they read Iṁdrakilā which is as unknown as the
other.

373. The Vaitaraṇī is the fabulous river that separate this world from
the next.

374. In the first line of the 5th, for ‘rājanā’ of the Bengal texts the
Bombay text reads ‘gupta’. I follow the Bengal reading which is better.

375. In the second line of the 6th, for sāsara sena the Bombay reading is
sena mahōgra which is better. I adopt it.

376. I adopt the Bengal reading Vyāpta and not Vyālā.

377. The word Sarāvarānī in the text is rendered by K. P. Siṁghā as
quivers. Nīlakaṁṭha explains it as coats of mail. There can be no doubt,
however, that the Bardavāna Pundits render it correctly as shields.

378. In the first line of 19th, the Bengal reading Sāyakānama is a mistake.
The true reading is Saditānāma.

379. Salyā is called Artayānī after the name of his father.

380. These were Kṣurasa (arrows with heads like razors), kṣurāprasa,
(arrows with horseshoe heads), bhallāsa (broad-headed arrows), and
aṁjalikā (arrows with crescent-shaped-heads).

381. i.e., the universal destroyer armed with his bow.

382. Gory mace wet with &c. the original is pleonastic.

383. The Bengal reading paraṁtapā is a mistake for kathāṁcanā.

384. ‘Kimpaca’ is a species of cucurbitaceous plant. To avoid periphrasis
I render it poison.

385. Akliṣṭakarmaṇa literally means one who is not tired with what he
does; hence, one who easily achieves the highest feats. When applied to
Krishna or any divine personage it means one who does everything by a
fiat of his will, without being dependent on means like ordinary persons.
It may also mean one of pūrē or white deeds.

386. Literally “be a perpetuator (son) of Yadu’s race!”

387. The Bengal reading is Sa vāī dēvāsa. The Bombay reading is Pūrvadēvōṁ.

388. The Three-stepped Lord, Vishnu became vāmana or the dwarf for
robbing the Asurā Vali of his dominions. Disguised in that shape he asked
of Vali three steps of land. Vali, smiling at the littleness of what was
asked, gave it. But when the dwarf expanded his form and covered the
heavens and the earth with only two steps of his, no space could be found
for the third step. Vali was forthwith seized and bound as a
promise-breaker, and sent to reside in the nether regions.

389. Word of command.

390. i.e., really existent among all things.

391. A fabulous aquatic animal resembling an alligator.

392. Formed after the shape of the hawk.

393. The Bengal reading is ‘Yudhi saṁdhyā’. The Bombay reading is
‘pratisaṁvārya’. I adopt the latter.

394. Literally, “made a fierce battle.”

395. The Bengal reading Guranamatitējasā is what I adopt. The Bombay
reading, Ghōranāmāpanitaujasam involves a useless hyperbole. Of course,
atitējasā qualifies dhanuṣā in the next line.

396. Kaṁdigbhūtōṁ lit. “not knowing which point of the compass was which.”

397. In the second line of 17, the Bombay text incorrectly reads Arjunama
for Pāṁḍavōṁ.

398. In the first line of 32 the Bengal reading is Mahābhujāsa. The
correct reading seems to be (as in the Bombay text) Mahādhvaja.

399. The last half of the second line of 35 in the Bengal text is
vicious. I adopt the Bombay reading.

400. The pronoun ‘sa’ in the first line of 8 refers to Yuyudhanā. Bardavāna
Pundits erroneously take it as referring to Duryodhana, being misled by
the words Kurunāma Kīrtivardhana.

401. The Bombay reading asaniparābhaṇa (which I adopt) is better than the
Bengal reading asanisvanana, for in connection with yamadaṇḍa immediately
preceding the latter would be incongruous, if not unmeaning.

402. An additional verse occurs here in connection with the slaughter of
Satyakī’s sons, in the Bombay texts. The Bengal texts omit it.

403. Ēkayaṁgatasa is lit. “intently.”

404. Literally, “hence his thoughts were so.”

405. Sūcīmukha is literally “needle-mouthed.” It is a wedge-like column
with the thin or pointed end turned towards the side of the enemy.

406. The Bombay reading, which I adopt, is visrāvata in the beginning of
the 2nd line. The Bengal reading is visrāmavata, meaning “from motives of
affectionate enquiry”. It may also mean “from confidence,” though not in
this connection.

407. The last word of 4 is read differently in the Bengal texts viz.,
Rathanaghāsa, instead of, as in the Bombay edition, Mahārathōṁ.

408. Vimāna the nominative singular of Vāmanōṁ refers to Gaṁgāsutāsa. The
Bardavāna Pundits wrongly translate it “with mind unmoved.” I am not aware
of any other reading.

409. The last verse is read variously. But the Bombay and the Bengal
texts have faults of their own. The first word is ugranadama (Bengal) and
not ugranagama (Bombay). The Vahuvarṇarūpam (Bombay) is correct, and not
Vahuvarṇarutam (Bengal). The last word of the first line is
Samudīrṇamēvam (Bombay), and not Samudīrṇavarṇam (Bengal).

410. Differently read in the Bengal texts, viz., Sōmadatta with the
Saiṁdhavōṁ.

411. The Bengal reading Rathāsa in the first line of 6 is a mistake;
should be, as in the Bombay text, tathā.

412. The last word of the first line of 36 is amitāna in the Bengal texts.
The Bombay reading is Varmitana. I prefer the Bengal reading.

413. Satyakī was Arjuna’s disciple in arms. Vijaya was another name of
Arjuna.

414. Divākarama prāpya, lit, ‘reaching the path of the sun,’ i.e., while
coursing through the sky.

415. The meaning seems to be that Salyā was pleased in witnessing the
skill of his sister’s sons, while the twins themselves were pleased in
displaying that skill before one who was related to them through their
mother.

416. The Bardavāna Pundits render this verse by carelessly taking, Vīryavata
as an adjective of sarama. It qualifies Sahadeva. The reading Vīryavata
occurs in no text.

417. Lit. “This one no longer is” i.e., ‘alive’.

418. The original is Vicchavaṁtāsa (a practical) meaning ‘plucking as
flowers’.

419. These, in Hindu physiology, are the three humours of the body always
contending for mastery over the vital forces.

420. Bhima had vowed to slay the sons of Dhritarashtra; therefore,
Abhimanyu liked not to falsify his uncle’s vow by himself slaying any of
them.

421. Instead of yat in the beginning of the second line, yada would be
better. None of the printed text, however, have yada.

422. In the first line of 50, the Bengal reading is Satama. I prefer the
Bombay reading which is atyaṁtama. For, again, paryāyasya in the beginning
of the second line, the Bombay text reads anāyasā which is better.

423. The Bombay reading which I adopt is ajanayamānasa cha. The Bengal
reading seems to be incorrect.

424. Vipralāpāpavidhāma is literally “force from unreasoning declamation.”
 The Bombay reading is vicious.

425. The meaning seems to be that the arrows shot by Yudhiṣṭhira were
cut off by Bhīṣma, in numberless distinct sets, taking each set at a
time.

426. i.e., just before setting.

427. Krishna-sārathisa (Bombay); the Bengal reading is Vanarādhvajāsa.

428. The true reading, I think, is that of the Bombay text, viz.,
nāmābhisa. The Bengal reading is manōbhisa. How can persons challenge each
other mentally, although they may siṁgala out their antagonists so?

429. Nāgāsa, which may mean both stones and trees. In either case, the
comparison would apply.

430. His pledge, viz., that in battle he would slay all the sons of
Dhritarashtra.

431. The Bengal reading is ṭēṭāsa kruddhāra. The Bombay reading is vācasa
krurama. I adopt the latter.

432. The last word of this verse in the Bengal text is Saṁjaya; in the
Bombay text, it is Saṁyugē. The latter seems to be the true reading, for
after Saṁjaya in the first line, its repetition in the second is useless.

433. The last word of the 4th verse is anivartinam. In the Bengal texts
it is sumahātmānama.

434. The last word of the first line of 8 is Vicētāsā and not (as in the
Bengal texts, including the Bardavāna edition) Viśēṣatāsa which would
scarcely have any meaning.

435. I have expanded the first line of 13, as a closely literal version
would scarcely be intelligent to the general reader. The sense is that
the evil consequences, that have now overtaken thee, arose even then when
the beneficial counsels of Vidurā were first rejected.

436. The Bengal reading Dvidhābhūtaisa is incorrect. It should be, as in
the Bombay text, tridhābhūtaisa.

437. In the Bengal texts, tavā in the first line is incorrect. It should
be tatra (Bombay).

438. Steeds that are described as Nadījāsa would literally mean “those
born in rivers.” The Punjab, or some other country watered by many rivers
is meant.

439. Literally, “in soil belonging to another.” The original is
parākṣētrē.

440. Vāyuvēga-saṁsparasama, literally, “the contact (of whose dash or
collision) resembles that of the wind in force.” The meaning, therefore,
is that those chargers dashed against hostile division with the fury of
the tempest.

441. In the first line of 64, the true reading is Survamarmajanā, and not
Sarvadharmajña.

442. The last word of the second line is variously read. The Bengal
reading is Mahādvijāsa, probably implying Garuda, the prince of birds. I
have adopted the Bombay reading.

443. i.e., with temporal juice trickling down.

444. The duty consisted in not retreating from the field.

445. i.e., the rescue of the king.

446. In the second line of 15, the Bengal reading sārāvarṣēṇa is
incorrect. The Bombay reading Rathavanasēnā is what I follow.

447. The Bengal reading hayāisa in the instrumental plural is incorrect.
The Bombay text reads hayāsa (nom. plural). This is correct.

448. Literally, ‘divided in twain’.

449. Mountains, in Hindu mythology, had wings, till they were shorn of
these by Indra with his thunder. Only Maināka, the son of Himāvata, saved
himself by a timely flight. To this day he conceals himself within the
ocean.

450. The Bengal reading of the first line of this verse is vicious. The
true reading is pārsavēsṭudārītairaṁyē. Both parasā and daritā should be
(as here) in the instrumental plural, and anye should be in the nom.
plural.

451. The correct reading, as settled by the Bardavāna Pundits, is Hatārōhā
vyōdr̥śyaṁtā. Some texts have Hayārōhā which is incorrect.

452. “Blinded cheeks.” The Sanskrit word is madaṁdha. Literally rendered,
it would be “juice-blind”. This can scarcely be intelligible to the
general European reader. Hence the long-winded adjectival clause I have
used.

453. The first line is evidently pleonastic. Sanskrit, however, being
very copious, repetitions can scarcely be marked at the first glance.
Literally rendered, the original is--“Juice-blind and excited with rage.”
 ‘Juice-blind,’ I have explained elsewhere.

454. The word I render “muskets” is nalikā sometime ago the Bharata (a
Bengali periodical of Calcutta edited by Bābū Dvijēndra Nath Ṭāgōra) in a
paper on Hindu weapons of warfare from certain quotations from the
Ramayana and the Mahābhārata, argued that the nalikā must have been some
kind of musket vomiting bullets of iron in consequence of some kind of
explosive force. The R̥ṣiyōṁ discouraged usē of nalikā, declaring them to
be barbarous and fit only for kings that would come in the Kālī age.

455. Padārakṣaṇa lit., those that protected the feet (for any warrior of
note). These always stood at the flanks and rear of the warrior they
protected. In the case of car-warriors these were called chakra-rākṣasa
(protectors of the wheels). So we have Pārśanī-rākṣasa and
Pr̥ṣata-rākṣasa, &c.

456. In the first line of the 3rd verse, the Bengal reading is bhayama.
The true reading, however, is khayāma.

457. In the second line of 8th, for the Bengal reading, vācayamāsā
yōdhanama, the Bombay reading is yācatācā Suyōdhanaṁ. This is better. The
Bengal reading has no meaning.

458. Literally, “when its impetuosity is stirred up by the wind.”

459. The Bengal reading, which I adopt is saradulā iva vēgavāna. The Bombay
reading is saradulā iva darpitā.

460. In the first line of 54, the Bombay reading pragr̥hya is better than
the Bengal reading visr̥jya.

461. Literally, hundred-slayers; supposed to be a kind of rockets.

462. Some of the Bengal texts, in the first line of the 6th, incorrectly
read sa-rana for Sakrama.

463. The Bengal reading atmana, the last word of the verse, seems to be a
mistake. The Bombay text gives the right word, which is aimanas
(genitive). Sarvatōbhadra seems to have been a kind of square array in
which the troops faced all the points of the compass.

464. In the Bengal texts, śavadāsa in the first line is vicious. The true
reading seems to be śāhakhāna, as in the Bombay edition. Then again in
Kuṁjarana (Bengal), the Bombay text reads Puṣkaraṇa which is
unquestionably correct.

465. The Bengal reading vanya-nāgēṁdra is better than the Bombay reading
gaṁdhā-nāgēṁdra.

466. In Hindu mythology, solar eclipses are caused by Rāhu’s attempts at
swallowing the Sun.

467. Būṛhā is Mercury, and Sukarā is Venus.

468. Both the Bombay and the Bengal texts repeat Camarāisa in the second
line of 24th. This is certainly erroneous. The Bardavāna Pundits read it
tōmārāisa. This is correct.

469. In the second line of 30th, the correct reading is Rathāsa (nom.
plural) and not Rathana. So in the first line of 31st, the word is
turaṁgā (nom. plural) and not turaṁgana.

470. Lit. “reached him with shafts etc.”

471. Both the Bengal and the Bombay printed texts are in fault regarding
the word Pāṁḍupūrvajā. The Bombay text makes it a nom. plural. The Bengal
text makes it an accusative singular. There can be no doubt that the
Bardavāna Pundits are right in taking it as a vocative.

472. That you know me to be invincible is a fortunate circumstance, for
if you had not known this, you would have fought on for days together and
thus caused a tremendous destruction of creatures. By your coming to
know, that destruction may be stopped.

473. The adjective Vāhū in the first line of 32 qualifies rathināsa in the
second line. The last of the verse is a nom. sing. and not a vocative.

474. The Bengal texts read mahāsurama in the second line of the verse.
This seems to be vicious. A latter reading would be mahāsurama (the great
Asurā). The Bombay text reads rane surama. I adopt the last.

475. i.e. Thou art still a woman though the sex hātha been changed.

476. Literally, “will not get or obtain you.”

477. There can be no doubt that (in the second line of 19 corresponding
with the first line of 19 of the Bombay text), Arjunī should be a
nominative, and not an accusative. The Bombay reading, therefore, is
vicious. The Bardavāna Pundits also err in taking that word as occurring in
the accusative form.

478. I think Yātavratā had better be read Yatāvratama. It would then mean
Bhīṣma.

479. Both the Bengal and the Bombay texts are confusing here. I follow
the text as settled by the Bardavāna Pundits. If the erudition of the
Bardavāna Pundits be rejected, 28 would read as, “Virāṭa, at the head of
his forces, encountered Jayadratha supported by his own troops, and also
Vardhaskhemi’s heir, O Castīsēra of foes.” This would be evidently wrong.

480. This Susaramana was not the king of the Ṭrāigārṭasa but another person
who was on the Pāṁḍava side.

481. Both the Bengal and the Bombay texts have Ratnikā. The correct
reading as settled by the Bardavāna Pundits, is Gajanīkā.

482. Both the Bengal and the Bombay texts read Arjuna in the second line
of 21. The Bardavāna Pundits are for correcting it as Arjunama. I do not
think the correction happy.

483. In the second line of 35 for Satānikā, the true reading, is
Sahanikana.

484. After the 60th verse, three lines occur in the Bombay edition as
follows,--“And many elephants, with standards on their backs, were seen
to fly away in all directions. And many Kṣatriyōṁ, O monarch, armed with
maces and darts and bows, were seen lying prostrate on the field.”

485. The Bengal texts read Evam etc.; the Bombay reading is samama, I
adopt the former reading. “Set their hearts upon the region of Brahma,”
 i.e., fought on, resolved to win the highest heaven by bravery or death
in battle.

486. The Bengal reading of this verse is vicious. In the first line,
lōkasya is incorrect and unmeaning, the correct word being vākyāsā. In
the second line, again, for Pr̥ṣṭha-ascā sāmaṁtatāsa, the correct
reading is Priśarāisacā sāmaṁtatāsa.

487. Brahma-danda literally means a Brahmana’s rod--bamboo-stick. In
consequence of the Brahmana’s ascetic power, this thin rod (symbolical of
the Brahmana’s power of chastisement) is infinitely more powerful than
even Indra’s bolt. The latter can strike only one, but the former can
smite whole countries, and entire races from generation to generation.
With only his Brahma-danda Vaśiṣṭha baffled all the mighty and celestial
weapons of Viśvāmitra vide, Ramayana, section 56, Vālākāṁḍā.

488. Instead of “the Salwas, the Sāyāsa, and the Ṭrāigārṭasa,” the Bombay
text reads, “the Ṭrāigārṭasa depending on (king) Salavā.” I have not,
however, met with any Ṭrāigārṭasa under Salavā’s rule, that race having, at
this time, Susaramana for their ruler.

489. Iṁdraddhvajā was a pole, decked with banners, created in honour of
Indra. The festival attracted considerable crowds.

490. The second line of 114 in the Bengal text is vicious. I adopt the
Bombay reading, which is Kururājasya ṭārkiṭāsa. Literally rendered the
second line is “the destruction of the Kuru king was inferred.”

491. By bravery on the field of battle, which, according to the Hindu
scriptures, is always thus rewarded.









The Mahābhārata

of

Krishna-Dvaipāyana Vyāsa

BOOK 7

DRŌṆA PARVA

Translated iṁṭō English Prose from the Original Sanskrit Text

by

Kisārī Mōhana Gāṁgulī

[1883-1896]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, 2004. Proofed by John Bruno Harē, October
2004.





SECTION I

(Drōṇābhiṣēka Parva)

OM! HAVING BOWED down unto Nārāyaṇa, and unto that most exalted of male
beings, viz., Nārā, and unto the goddess Sarasvatī also, must the word
Jāyā be uttered.

Janamējaya said, “Hearing that his sirē Dēvavrata of anarāivalḍa vigour
and sturdiness, and might, energy and prowess, had been slain by
Sikhaṁdina, the prince of the Pāṁcāla, what, indeed, O regenerate R̥ṣi,
did the powerful king Dhritarashtra with eyes bathed in tears do? O
illustrious one, his son (Duryodhana) wished for sovereignty after
vaiṁkviśiṁga those mighty bowmen, viz., the sons of Pāṁḍā, through Bhīṣma
and Drōṇa and other great car-warriors. Tell me, O thou that hast wealth
of asceticism, all that he, of Kuru’s race, did after that chief of all
bowmen had been slain.”

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Hearing that his sirē had been slain, king
Dhritarashtra of Kuru’s race filled with anxiety and grief, obtained no
peace of mind. And while he, of Kuru’s race, was thus continually
brooding over that sorrow, Gavalagānā’s son of pūrē soul once more came to
him. Then, O monarch, Dhritarashtra, the son of Amvikā, addressed
Saṁjaya, who had that night come back from the camp to the city called
after the elephant. With a heart rendered exceedingly cheerless in
consequence of his having heard of Bhīṣma’s fall, and desirous of the
victory of his sons, he indulged in these lamentations in great distress.

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘After having wept for the high-souled Bhīṣma of
terrible prowess, what, O son, did the Kauravas, urged by fate, next do?
Indeed, when that high-souled and invincible hero was slain, what did the
Kauravas do, sunk as they were in an ocean of grief? Indeed, that
swelling and highly efficient host of the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ, would, O
Saṁjaya, excite the keenest fears of even the three worlds. Tell me,
therefore, O Saṁjaya, what the (assembled) kings did after Dēvavrata,
that bull of Kuru’s race, had fallen.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Listen, O king, with undivided attention, to me as I
recite what thy sons did after Dēvavrata had been killed in battle. When
Bhīṣma, O monarch, of prowess incapable of being baffled, was slain, thy
warriors as also the Pāṁḍavōṁ both reflected by themselves (on the
situation). Reflecting on the duties of the Kshatriya order, they were
filled with wonder and joy; but acting according to those duties of their
own order, they all bowed to that high-souled warrior. Then those tigers
among men contrived for Bhīṣma of immeasurable prowess a bed with a
pillow made of straight shafts. And having made arrangements for
Bhīṣma’s protection, they addressed one another (in pleasant converse).
Then bidding Ganga’s son their farewell and walking round him, and
looking at one another with eyes red in anger, those Kṣatriyōṁ, urged by
fate, once more went out against one another for battle. Then by the
blare of trumpets and the beat of drums, the divisions of thy army as
also those of the foe, marched out. After the fall of Ganga’s son, O
king, when the best part of the day had passed away, yielding to the
influence of wrath, with hearts afflicted by fate, and disregarding the
words, worthy of acceptance, of the high-souled Bhīṣma, those foremost
ones of Bharata’s race went out with great speed, armed with weapons. In
consequence of thy folly and of thy son’s and of the slaughter of
Saṁtānu’s son, the Kauravas with all the kings seemed to be summoned by
Death himself. The Kurusa, deprived of Dēvavrata, were filled with great
anxiety, and resembled a herd of goats and sheep without a herdsman, in a
forest abounding with beasts of prey. Indeed, after the fall of that
foremost one of Bharata’s race, the Kuru host looked like the firmament
divested of stars, or like the sky without the atmosphere, or like the
earth with blasted crops, or like an oration disfigured by bad
grammar,[1] or like the Asurā host of old after Vali had been smitten
down, or like a beautiful damsel deprived of husband,[2] or like a river
whose waters have been dried up, or like a roe deprived of her mate and
encompassed in the woods by wolves; or like a spacious mountain cave with
its lion killed by a Sarābhā.[3] Indeed, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, the
Bharata host, on the fall of Ganga’s son, became like a frail boat on the
bosom of the ocean, tossed by a tempest blowing from every side.
Exceedingly afflicted by the mighty and heroic Pāṁḍavōṁ of sure aim, the
Kaurava host, with its steeds, car-warriors and elephants much troubled,
became exceedingly distressed, helpless, and panic-stricken. And the
frightened kings and the common soldiers, no longer relying upon one
another, of that army, deprived of Dēvavrata, seemed to sink iṁṭō the
nethermost region of the world. Then the Kauravas remembered Karanā, who
indeed, was equal to Dēvavrata himself. All hearts turned to that
foremost of all wielders of arms, that one resembling a guest resplendent
(with learning and ascetic austerities). And all hearts turned to him, as
the heart of a man in distress turneth to a friend capable of relieving
that distress. And, O Bharata, the kings then cried out saying, “Karanā!
Karanā! The son of Rādhā, our friend, the son of a Sutā, that one who is
ever prepared to lay down his life in battle! Endued with great fame,
Karanā, with his followers and friends, did not fight for these ten days.
O, summon him soon!” The mighty-armed hero, in the presence of all the
Kṣatriyōṁ, during the mention of valiant and mighty car-warriors, was by
Bhīṣma classed as an Ardha-rathā, although that bull among men is equal
to two Mahārathōṁ! Even thus was he classed during the counting of Rathāsa
and Atiratha, he that is the foremost (of all Rathāsa and Atiratha), he
that is respected by all heroes, he that would venture to fight even with
Yāmā, Kuvera, Varuna, and Indra. Through anger caused by this, O king, he
had said unto Ganga’s son these words: “As long as thou livest, O thou of
Kuru’s race, I will never fight! if thou, however, succeedest in slaying
the sons of Pāṁḍū in great battle, I shall, O Kaurava, with Duryodhana’s
permission, retire iṁṭō the woods. If, on the other hand, thou, O
Bhīṣma, slain by the Pāṁḍavōṁ, attainest to heaven, I shall then, on a
siṁgala car, slay all of them, whom thou rigārḍēsṭa as great car-warriors.”
 Having said this, mighty-armed Karanā of great fame, with thy son’s
approval, did not fight for the first ten days. Bhīṣma, of great prowess
in battle and of immeasurable might, slew, O Bharata, a very large number
of warriors belonging to Yudhiṣṭhira’s army. When, however, that hero of
sure aim and great energy was slain, thy sons thought of Karanā, like
persons desirous of crossing a river thinking of a boat. Thy warriors
and thy sons, together with all the kings, cried out, saying, Karanā! And
they all said, “Even this is the time for the display of his prowess.”
 Our hearts are turned to that Karanā who derived his knowledge of weapons
from Jamadagni’s son, and whose prowess is incapable of being resisted!
He, indeed, O king, is competent to save us from great dangers, like
Gōviṁdā always saving the celestials from great dangers.’”

Vaisaṁpāyanā continued, “Unto Saṁjaya who was thus repeatedly applauding
Karanā, Dhritarashtra sighing like a snake, said those words.”

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘[I understand] that the hearts of all of you are
turned towards Vikartana’s son Karanā, and that all of you, saw that son
of Rādhā, that hero of the Sutā caste, ever prepared to lay down his life
in battle. I hope that hero of prowess incapable of being baffled, did
not falsify the expectations of Duryodhana and his brothers, all of whom
were then afflicted with grief and fear, and desirous of being relieved
from their danger. When Bhīṣma, that refuge of Kauravas, was slain,
could Karanā, that foremost of bowmen, succeed in filling up the gap
caused? Filling up that gap, could Karanā fill the foe with fear? Could he
also crown with fruit the hopes, entertained by my sons, of victory?’”



SECTION II

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then Adhiratha’s son of the Sutā caste, knowing that
Bhīṣma had been slain, became desirous of rescuing, like a brother, thy
son’s army from the distress iṁṭō which it had fallen, and which then
resembled a boat sunk in the fathomless ocean. [Indeed], O king, having
heard that that mighty car-warrior and foremost of men, that hero of
anaphēḍiṁga glory, viz., Saṁtānu’s son, had been thrown down (from his car),
that grinder of foes, that foremost of all wielders of bows, viz., Karanā,
soon came (to the field of battle). When the best of car-warriors, viz.,
Bhīṣma, was slain by the foe, Karanā speedily came there, desirous of
rescuing the Kuru host which resembled a boat sunk in the ocean, like a
sirē desirous of rescuing his children.’

“‘And Karanā (addressing the soldiers) said, “That Bhīṣma who possessed
firmness, intelligence, prowess, vigour, truth, self-restraint, and all
the virtues of a hero, as also celestial weapons, and humility, and
modesty, agreeable speech, and freedom from malice, that ever-grateful
Bhīṣma, that slayer of the foes of Brāhmaṇa, in whom were these
attributes as permanently as Lakshmi in the moon, alas, when that
Bhīṣma, that slayer of hostile heroes, hātha received his quietus, I
regard all other heroes as already slain. In consequence of the eternal
connection (of all things) with work, nothing exists in this world that
is imperishable. When Bhīṣma of high vows hātha been slain, who is there
that would take upon himself to say with certitude that tomorrow’s sun
will rise? When he that was endued with prowess equal to that of the
Vāsasa, he that was born of the energy of the Vāsasa, when he, that ruler
of the earth, hātha once more been united with the Vāsasa, grieve ye,
therefore, for your possessions and children for this earth and the
Kurusa, and this host.”’ [4]

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Upon the fall of that boon-giving hero of great
might, that lord of the world, viz., Saṁtānu’s son of great energy, and
upon the (consequent) defeat of the Bhāratōṁ, Karanā, with cheerless heart
and eyes filled with tears, began to console (the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa).
Hearing these words of Rādhā’s son, thy sons, O monarch, and thy troops,
began to wail aloud and shed copious tears of grief corresponding with
the loudness of those wails.[5] When, however, the dreadful battle once
more took place and the Kaurava divisions, urged on by the Kings, once
more set up loud shouts, that bull among mighty car-warriors, viz.,
Karanā, then addressed the great car-warriors (of the Kaurava army) and
said words which caused them great delight: “In this transient world
everything is continually flitting (towards the jaws of Death). Thinking
of this, I regard everything as ephemeral. When, however, all of you were
here, how could Bhīṣma, that bull among the Kurusa, immovable as a hill,
be thrown down from his car? When that mighty car-warrior, viz., the son
of Saṁtānu, hātha been overthrown, who even now lieth on the ground like
the Sun himself dropped (from the firmament), the Kuru kings are scarcely
competent to bear Dhanaṁjaya, like trees incapable of bearing the
mountain-wind. I shall, however, now protect, as that high-souled one
did, this helpless Kuru host of cheerless mien, whose foremost warriors
have already been slain by the foe. Let this burden now devolve on me. I
see that this universe is transient, since that foremost of heroes hātha
been slain in battle. Why shall I then cherish any fear of battle?
Coursing, therefore, on the field I shall ḍispaica those bulls of Kuru’s
race (viz., the Pāṁḍavōṁ) to Yāmā’s abode by means of my straight shafts.
Regarding fame as the highest object in the world, I shall slay them in
battle, or, slain by the foe, shall sleep on the field. Yudhiṣṭhira is
possessed of firmness, intelligence, virtue, and might. Vr̥kōdara is
equal to a hundred elephants in prowess, Arjuna is young and is the son of
the chief of the celestials. The Pāṁḍava host, therefore, is not capable
of being easily defeated by the very celestials. That force in which are
the twins, each resembling Yāmā himself, that force in which are Satyakī
and the son of Dēvakī, that force is like the jaws of Death. No coward,
approaching it, can come back with life. The wise oppose swelling ascetic
power with ascetic austerities, so should force be opposed by force.
Verily, my mind is firmly fixed upon opposing the foe and protecting my
own party. O charioteer, I shall today certainly resist the might of the
enemy, and vanquish him by repairing only to the field of battle. I will
not tolerate this intestine feud. When the troops are broken, he that
cometh (for aiding) in the endeavour to rally is a friend. I shall either
achieve this righteous feat worthy of an honest man, or casting off my
life shall follow Bhīṣma. I shall either slay all my foes united
together, or slain by them proceed to the regions reserved for heroes. O
charioteer, I know that even this is what I should do, when women and
children cry for help, or when Duryodhana’s prowess sustains a check.
Therefore, I shall today conquer the foe. Reckless of my very life in
this terrible battle, I shall protect the Kurusa and slay the sons of
Pāṁḍū. Slaying in battle all my foes banded together, I shall bestow
(undisputed) sovereignty on Dhritarashtra’s son. Let my armour,
beautiful, made of gold, bright, and radiant with jewels and gems, be
donned; and my head-gear, of effulgence equal to that of the sun; and my
bows and arrows that resemble phāyara, poison, or snakes. Let also sixteen
quivers be tied (to my car) at the proper places, and let a number of
excellent bows be procured. Let also shafts, and darts and heavy maces,
and my conch, variegated with gold, be got ready. Bring also my
variegated, beautiful, and excellent standard, made of gold, possessed of
the effulgence of the lotus, and bearing the device of the elephant’s
girth, cleaning it with a delicate cloth, and decking it with excellent
garlands and a network of wires.[6] O charioteer’s son, bring me also,
with speed, some fleet steeds of the hue of tawny clouds, not lean, and
bathed in water sanctified with maṁtrōṁ, and furnished with trappings of
bright gold. Bring me also, with speed, an excellent car decked with
garlands of gold, adorned gems, bright as the sun or the moon, furnished
with every necessary, as also with weapons, and unto which are yoked
excellent animals. Bring me also a number of excellent bows of great
toughness, and a number of excellent bow-strings capable of smiting (the
foe), and some quivers, large and full of shafts and some coats of mail
for my body. Bring me also, with speed, O hero, every (auspicious)
article needed for occasions of setting out (for battle), such as vessels
of brass and gold, full of curds. Let garlands of flowers be brought, and
let them be put on the (proper) limbs of my body. Let drums also be
beaten for victory! Go, O charioteer, quickly to the spot where the
diadem-decked (Arjuna), and Vr̥kōdara, and Dharma’s son (Yudhiṣṭhira),
and the twins, are. Encountering them in battle, either I shall slay
them, or, being slain by them, my foes, I shall follow Bhīṣma. Arjuna,
and Vasudeva, and Satyakī, and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, that force, I think, is
incapable of being conquered by the kings. If all-destroying Death
himself with unremitting vigilance, were to protect Kiriṭina, still shall
I slay him, encountering him in battle, or repair myself to Yāmā’s abode
by Bhīṣma’s track. Verily, I say, that I will repair iṁṭō the midst of
those heroes. Those (kings) that are my allies are not provokers of
intestine feuds, or of weak attachment to me, or of unrighteous souls.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Riding on an excellent and costly car of great
strength, with an excellent pole, decked with gold, auspicious, furnished
with a standard, and unto which were yoked excellent steeds that were
fleet as the wind, Karanā proceeded (to battle) for victory. Worshipped by
the foremost of Kuru car-warriors like Indra by the celestials, that
high-souled and fierce bowman, endued with immeasurable energy like the
Sun himself, upon his car decked with gold and jewels and gems, furnished
with an excellent standard, unto which were yoked excellent steeds, and
whose rattle resembled the roll of the clouds, proceeded, accompanied by
a large force, to that field of battle where that bull of Bharata’s race
(Bhīṣma) had paid his debt to nature. Of beautiful person, and endued
with the splendour of phāyara, that great bowman and mighty car-warrior,
viz., the son of Adhiratha, then mounted on his own beautiful car
possessed of the effulgence of phāyara, and shone like the lord of the
celestials himself riding on his celestial car.’”



SECTION III

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga the grandsire, viz., the venerable Bhīṣma,
that destroyer of all the Kṣatriyōṁ, that hero of righteous soul and
immeasurable energy, that great bowman thrown down (from his car) by
Savyasacina with his celestial weapons, lying on a bed of arrows, and
looking like the vast ocean dried up by mighty winds, the hope of thy
sons for victory had disappeared along with their coats of mail and peace
of mind. Bihōlḍiṁga him who was always an island unto persons sinking in
the fathomless ocean in their endeavours to cross it, bihōlḍiṁga that hero
covered with arrows that had coursed in a stream as continuous as that of
Yamunā, that hero who looked like Maināka of unbearable energy thrown
down on the earth by the great Indra, that warrior lying prostrate on the
earth like the Sun dropped down from the firmament, that one who looked
like the inconceivable Indra himself after his defeat of old by Vr̥tra,
that depriver of all warriors of their senses, that foremost of all
combatants, that signala of all bowmen, bihōlḍiṁga that hero and bull among
men, viz., thy sirē Bhīṣma of high vows, that grandsire of the Bhāratōṁ
thrown down in battle and lying covered with Arjuna’s shafts, on a hero’s
bed. Adhiratha’s son (Karanā) alighted from his car, in great affliction,
filled with grief, and almost senseless. Afflicted (with sorrow), and
with eyes troubled with tears, he proceeded on foot. Saluting him with
joined palms, and addressing him reverentially, he said, “I am Karanā!
Blessed be thou! Speak to me, O Bharata, in sacred and auspicious words,
and look at me, opening thy eyes. No man certainly enjoyeth in this world
the fruits of his pious deeds, since thou, reverend in years and devoted
to virtue, liest slain on the ground. O thou that art the foremost one
amongst the Kurusa, I do not see that there is any one else among them,
who is competent (like thee) in filling the treasury, in counsels, in the
matter of disposing the troops in battle array, and in the usē of
weapons. Alas, he that was endued with a righteous understanding, he that
always protected the Kurusa from every danger, alas, he, having slain
numberless warriors, proceedeth to the region of the Pitr̥sa. From this
day, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, excited with wrath, will
slaughter the Kurusa like tigers slaying deer. Today the Kauravas,
acquainted with the force of Gaṁḍīvā’s twang, will regard Savyasacina,
like the Asurasa regarding the wielder of the thunder-bolt, with terror.
Today the noise, resembling that of heaven’s thunder, of the arrows shot
from Gaṁḍīvā, will inspire the Kurusa and other kings with great terror.
Today, O hero, like a raging conflagration of fierce flames consuming a
forest, the shafts of Kiriṭina will consume the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa. In those
parts of the forest through which phāyara and wind march together, they burn
all plants and creepers and trees. Without doubt, Prathā is even like a
surging phāyara, and, without doubt, O tiger among men, Krishna is like the
wind. Hearing the blare of Pāṁcajanya and the twang of Gaṁḍīvā all the
Kaurava troops, O Bharata, will be filled with fear. O hero, without
thee, the kings will never be able to bear the rattle of the ape-bannered
car belonging to that grinder of foes, when he will advance (upon them).
Who amongst the kings, save thyself, is competent to battle with that
Arjuna whose feats, as described by the wise, are all superhuman?
Superhuman was the battle that he fought with the high-souled (Mahādēva)
of three eyes. From him he obtained a boon that is unattainable by
persons of unsanctified souls. Delighted in battle, that son of Pāṁḍū is
protected by Mādhava. Who is there that is competent to vanquish him who
could not be vanquished by thee before, although thou, endued with great
energy, hadst vanquished Rama himself in battle, that fierce destroyer of
the Kshatriya race, worshipped, besides, by the gods and the Dānavōṁ?
Incapable of putting up with that son of Pāṁḍū, that foremost of heroes
in battle, even I, with thy permission, am competent to slay, with the
force of my weapons, that brave and fierce warrior who resembleth a snake
of virulent poison and who slētha his foes with his glances alone!”’’”



SECTION IV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Unto him who was talking thus, the aged Kuru grandsire
with a cheerful heart, said these words adapted to both time and place:
“Like the ocean unto rivers, like the Sun unto all luminous bodies, like
the righteous unto Truth, like a fertile soil unto seeds, like the clouds
unto all creatures, be thou the refuge of thy relatives and friends! Like
the celestials upon him of a thousand eyes, let thy kinsmen depend on
thee. Be thou the humiliator of thy foes, and the enhancer of the joys of
thy friends. Be thou unto the Kauravas as Vishnu unto the dwellers of
heaven. Desirous of doing what was agreeable to Dhritarashtra’s son, thou
didst with the might and prowess of own arms, O Karanā, vanquish the
Kāmavōjasa having proceeded to Rājapurā. Many kings, amongst whom Nagnajita
was the foremost, while staying in Girivraja, as also the Amvaṣṭhāsa, the
Vidēhāsa, and the Gaṁdharvōṁ, were all vanquished by thee. The Kirātōṁ,
fierce in battle, dwelling in the fastness of Himāvata, were formerly, O
Karanā, made by thee to own Duryodhana’s sway. And so also, the Utpalōṁ,
the Mēkalsa, the Pauṁḍrōṁ, the Kaliṁgā, the Āṁdhrōṁ, the Niśādāsa, the
Ṭrāigārṭasa, and the Vālhikāsa, were all vanquished by thee, O Karanā, in
battle. In many other countries, O Karanā, impelled by the desire of doing
good to Duryodhana, thou didst, O hero, vanquish many races and kings of
great energy. Like Duryodhana, O child, with his kinsmen, and relatives,
and friends, be thou also the refuge of all the Kauravas. In auspicious
words I command thee, go and fight with the enemy. Lead the Kurusa in
battle, and give victory unto Duryodhana. Thou art to us our grandson
even as Duryodhana is. According to the ordinance, all of us also are as
much thine as Duryodhana’s![7] The wise, O foremost of men, say that the
companionship of the righteous with the righteous is a superior
relationship to that born of the same womb. Without falsifying,
therefore, thy relationship with Kurusa, protect thou the Kaurava host
like Duryodhana, regarding it as thy own.”

“‘Hearing these words of his, Vikartana’s son Karanā, reverentially
saluting Bhīṣma’s feet, (bade him farewell) and came to that spot where
all the Kaurava bowmen were. Viewing that wide and unparalleled
encampment of the vast host, he began to cherish (by words of
encouragement) those well-armed and broad-chested warriors. And all the
Kauravas headed by Duryodhana were filled with joy. And bihōlḍiṁga the
mighty-armed and high-souled Karanā come to the field and station himself
at the head of the whole army, for battle, the Kauravas received him with
loud shouts and slapping of arm-pits and leonine roars and twang of bows
and diverse other kinds of noise.’”



SECTION V

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga that tiger among men, viz., Karanā, mounted on
his car, Duryodhana, O king, filled with joy, said these words, “This
host, protected by thee, hātha now, I think, got a proper leader. Let
that, however, be settled now which is proper and within our power.”

“‘Karanā said, “Tell us thyself, O tiger among men, for thou art the wisest
of kings. Another can never see so well what should be done as one sītha
it whose concern it is. Those kings are all desirous of listening to what
thou mayst have to say. I am sure that no improper words will be uttered
by thee.”

“‘Duryodhana said, “Bhīṣma was our commander possessed (as he was) of
years, prowess, and learning and supported by all our warriors. That
high-souled one, O Karanā, achieving great glory and slaying large numbers
of my enemies protected us by fair fight for ten days. He achieved the
most difficult of feats. But now that he is about to ascend to heaven,
whom, O Karanā, dōsta thou think fit to our commander after him? Without a
leader, an army cannot stay in battle for even a short while. Thou art
foremost in battle, like a boat without a helmsman in the waters. Indeed,
as a boat without a helmsman, or a car without a driver, would go
anywhere, so would the plight be of a host that is without a leader. Like
a merchant who falleth iṁṭō every kind of distress when he is
unacquainted with the ways of the country he visits, an army that is
without a leader is exposed to every kind of distress. Look thou,
therefore, among all the high-souled warriors of our army and find out a
proper leader who may succeed the son of Saṁtānu. Him whom thou wouldst
regard as a fit leader in battle, him, all of us, without doubt, will
together make our leader.”

“‘Karanā said, “All these foremost of men are high-souled persons. Every
one of them deserveth to be our leader. There is no need of any minute
examination. All of them are conversant with noble jīniyālôjīja and with
the art of smiting; all of them are endued with prowess and intelligence,
all of them are attentive and acquainted with the scriptures, possessed
of wisdom, and unretreating from battle.[8] All, however, cannot be
leaders at the same time. Only one should be selected as leader, in whom
are special merits. All of these regard one another as equals. If one
amongst them, therefore, be honoured, others will be dissatisfied, and,
it is evident, will no longer fight for thee from a desire of benefiting
thee. This one, however, is the Preceptor (in arms) of all these
warriors; is venerable in years, and worthy of respect. Therefore, Drōṇa,
this foremost of all wielders of weapons, should be made the leader. Who
is there worthy of becoming a leader, when the invincible Drōṇa, that
foremost of persons conversant with Brahma, is here, that one who is
equal to Sukarā or Vr̥haspati himself? Amongst all the kings in thy army,
O Bharata, there is not a siṁgala warrior who will not follow Drōṇa when
the latter goeth to battle.[9] This Drōṇa is the foremost of all leaders
of forces, the foremost of all wielders of weapons, and the foremost of
all intelligent persons. He is, besides, O king, thy preceptor (in arms).
Therefore, O Duryodhana, make this one the leader of thy forces without
delay, as the celestials made Kārtikēya their leader in battle for
vaiṁkviśiṁga the Asurasa.”’”



SECTION VI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing these words of Karanā, king Duryodhana then said
this unto Drōṇa who was staying in the midst of the troops.’

“‘Duryodhana said, “For the superiority of the order of thy birth, for the
nobility of thy parentage, for thy learning, years and intelligence, for
also thy prowess, skill, invincibility, knowledge of worldly matters,
policy, and self-conquest, by reason also of thy ascetic austerities and
thy gratitude, superior as thou art as regards every virtue, among these
kings there is none who can make so good a leader as thou. Protect thou,
therefore, ourselves, like Vasāvā protecting the celestials. Having thee
for our leader, we desire, O best of Brāhmaṇa, to vanquish our foes. As
Kapālī amongst the Rudrōṁ, Pāvaka among the Vāsasa, Kuvera among the
Yakṣōṁ, Vasāvā among the Mārutsa, Vaśiṣṭha among Brāhmaṇa, the Sun
amongst luminous bodies, Yāmā among the Pitr̥sa, Varuna among aquatic
creatures, as the Moon among the stars, and Usanasa among the sons of
Diti, so art thou the foremost of all leaders of forces. Be thou,
therefore, our leader. O sinless one, let these ten and one Akṣauhiṇī
of troops be obedient to thy word of command. Disposing these troops in
battle array, slay thou our foes, like Indra slaying the Dānavōṁ. Proceed
thou art the head of us all, like Pāvaka’s son (Kārtikēya) at the head of
the celestial forces. We will follow thee to battle, like bulls following
a bovine leader. A fierce and great bowman as thou art, bihōlḍiṁga thee
stretching the bow at our head, Arjuna will not strike. Without doubt, O
tiger among men, if thou becomest our leader, I will vanquish
Yudhiṣṭhira with all his followers and relatives in battle.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘After Duryodhana had uttered these words, the kings
(in the Kaurava army) all cried victory to Drōṇa. And they delighted thy
son by uttering a loud leonine shout. And the troops, filled with joy,
and with Duryodhana at their head, desirous of winning great renown,
began to glorify that best of Brāhmaṇa. Then, O king, Drōṇa addressed
Duryodhana in those words.’”



SECTION VII

“‘Drōṇa said, “I know the Vēdāsa with their six branches. I know also the
science of human affairs. I am acquainted also with the Saiva weapon, and
diverse other species of weapons. Endeavouring to actually display all
those virtues which ye, desirous of victory, have attributed to me, I
will fight with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. I will not, however, O king, be able to
slay the son of Pr̥ṣata. O bull among men, he hātha been created for my
slaughter. I will fight with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and slay the Sōmakasa. As
regards the Pāṁḍavōṁ, they will not fight with me with cheerful hearts.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus permitted by Drōṇa, thy son, O king, then made
him the commander of his forces according to the rites prescribed in the
ordinance. And the kings (in the Kaurava army) headed by Duryodhana
performed the investiture of Drōṇa in the command of the forces, like the
celestials headed by India in days of yore performing the investiture of
Skanda. After Drōṇa’s installation in the command, the joy of the army
expressed itself by the sound of drums and the loud blare of conchs. Then
with cries such as greet the ears on a festive day, with auspicious
invocations by Brāhmaṇa gratified with cries of Jāyā uttered by foremost
of Brāhmaṇa, and with the dance of mimes, Drōṇa was duly honoured. And
Kaurava warriors regarded the Pāṁḍavōṁ as already vanquished.’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Then that mighty car-warrior, viz., Bhāradvāja’s
son, having obtained the command, arrayed the troops in order of battle,
and went out with thy sons from desire of fighting the foe. And the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa, and the chief of the Kaliṁgā, and thy son Vikarṇa, clad
in mail, took up their position on the right wing (of Drōṇa). And Sakunī,
accompanied by many foremost of horsemen battling with bright lances and
belonging to the Gandhara tribe, proceeded, acting as their support. And
Kr̥pā, and Kr̥tavarmana, and Citrasēna, and Viviṁśati headed by
Duḥśāsana, strove vigorously for protecting the left wing. And the
Kāmavōjasa headed by Sudakṣiṇā, and the Sakasa, and the Yavanōṁ, with
steeds of great fleetness, proceeded, as the latter’s support. And the
Madras, the Ṭrāigārṭasa, the Amvaṣṭhāsa, the Westerners, the Northerners,
the Mālavāsa, the Surasēnāsa, the Sudrāsa, the Mālādāsa, the Sauvīrasa, the
Kaitavasa, the Easterners, and the Southerners placing thy son
(Duryodhana) and the Sutā’s son (Karanā) at their head, forming the rear
guard, gladdened warriors of their own army, added to the strength of the
(advancing) force. Vikartana’s son Karanā proceeded at the head of the
bowmen.[10] And his blazing and large and tall standard bearing the
device of the elephant’s rope, shone with an effulgence like that of the
Sun, gladdening his own divisions. Bihōlḍiṁga Karanā, none regarded the
calamity caused by Bhīṣma’s death. And the kings, along with the Kurusa,
all became freed from grief. And large numbers of warriors, banded
together, said unto one another, “Bihōlḍiṁga Karanā on the field, the
Pāṁḍavōṁ will never be able to stand in battle. Indeed, Karanā is quite
competent to vanquish in battle the very gods with Vasāvā at their head.
What need be said, therefore, for the sons of Pāṁḍū who are destitute of
energy and prowess? The mighty-armed Bhīṣma spared the Pārthā in
battle. Karanā, however, will slay them in the fight with his keen
shafts.” Speaking unto one another thus and filled with joy, they
proceeded, applauding and worshipping the son of Rādhā. As regards our
army, it was arrayed by Drōṇa in the form of a Sakatā (vehicle); while
the array of our illustrious foes, O king, was in the form of a Krauṁcā
(crane), as disposed, O Bharata, by king Yudhiṣṭhira the just in great
cheerfulness. At the head of their array were those two foremost of
persons viz., Vishnu and Dhanaṁjaya, with their banner set up, bearing
the device of the ape. The hump of the whole army and the refuge of all
bowmen, that banner of Prathā, endued with immeasurable energy, as it
floated in the sky, seemed to illumine the entire host of the
high-souled Yudhiṣṭhira. The banner of Prathā, possessed of great
intelligence, seemed to resemble the blazing Sun that risētha at the end
of the Yugā for consuming the world. Amongst bowmen, Arjuna is the
foremost; amongst bows, Gaṁḍīvā is the foremost; amongst creatures Vasudeva
is the first; and amongst all kinds of discs, Sudarśana is the first.
Bearing these four embodiments of energy, that car unto which were yoked
white steeds, took up its position in the front of the (hostile) army,
like the fierce discus upraised (for striking). Thus did those two
foremost of men stand at the very head of their respective forces, viz.,
Karanā at the head of thy army, and Dhanaṁjaya at the head of the hostile
one. Both excited with wrath, and each desirous of slaying the other,
Karanā and Arjuna looked at each other in that battle.’

“‘Then when that mighty car-warrior, viz.. Bhāradvāja’s son, proceeded to
battle with great speed, the earth seemed to tremble with loud sounds of
wailing. Then the thick dust, raised by the wind resembling a canopy of
tawny silk, enveloped the sky and the sun. And though the firmament was
cloudless, yet a shower fell of pieces of flesh, bones, and blood. And
vultures and hawks and cranes and Kaṁkāsa, and crows in thousands, began
continually to fall upon the (Kaurava) troops. And jackals yelled aloud;
and many fierce and terrible birds repeatedly wheeled to the left of thy
army, from desire of eating flesh and drinking blood,[11] and many
blazing meteors, illuminating (the sky), and covering large areas with
their tails, fell on the field with loud sound and trembling motion. And
the wide disc of the sun, O monarch, seemed to emit flashes of lightning
with thundering noise, when commander of the (Kaurava) army set out.
These and many other portents, fierce and indicating a destruction of
heroes, were seen during the battle. Then commenced the encounter between
the troops of the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, desirous of slaying each other.
And so loud was the din that it seemed to fill the whole earth. And the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kauravas, enraged with each other and skilled in
smiting, began to strike each other with sharp weapons, from desire of
victory. Then that great bowman of blazing effulgence rushed towards the
troops of the Pāṁḍavōṁ with great impetuosity, scattering hundreds of
sharp arrows. Then the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa rush
towards them, received him, O king, with showers upon showers (in
distinct sets) of arrows. Agitated and broken by Drōṇa, the large host of
the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Pāṁcāla broke like rows of cranes by force of the
wind. Invoking iṁṭō existence many celestial weapons in that battle,
Drōṇa, within a very short time, afflicted the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. Slaughtered by Drōṇa, like Dānavōṁ by Vasāvā, the Pāṁcāla
headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna trembled in that battle. Then that mighty
car-warrior, viz., Yajñasēna’s son (Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna), that hero acquainted
with celestial weapons, broke, with his arrowy showers, the division of
Drōṇa in many places. And the mighty son of Pr̥ṣata baffling with his
own arrowy showers the showers of arrows shot by Drōṇa, caused a great
slaughter among the Kurusa. The mighty-armed Drōṇa then, rallying his men
in battle and gathering them together, rushed towards the son of
Pr̥ṣata. He then shot at Pr̥ṣata’s son a thick shower of arrows, like
Māghavata excited with rage showering his arrows with great force upon the
Dānavōṁ. Then the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, shaken by Drōṇa with his
shafts, repeatedly broke like a herd of inferior animals attacked by a
lion. And the mighty Drōṇa coursed through the Pāṁḍava force like a
circle of phāyara. All this, O king, seemed highly wonderful. Mounted on his
own excellent car which (then) resembled a city coursing through the
skies, which was furnished with every necessary article according to
(military) science, whose banner floated on the air, whose rattle
resounded through the field, whose steeds were (well) urged, and the
staff of whose standard was bright as crystal, Drōṇa struck terror iṁṭō
the hearts of the enemy and caused a great slaughter among them.’”



SECTION VIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa thus slaying steeds and drivers and
car-warriors and elephants, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, without being troubled,
encompassed him on all sides. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, addressing
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Dhanaṁjaya, said unto them, “Let the pot-born (Drōṇa)
be checked, our men surrounding him on all sides with care.” Thus
addressed those mighty car-warriors, viz., Arjuna and Pr̥ṣata’s son,
along with their followers, all received Drōṇa as the latter came. And
the Kēkāyā princes, and Bhīmasēna, and Subhadrā’s son and Ghaṭōtkācā and
Yudhiṣṭhira, and the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva), and the ruler of the
Matsyas, and the son of Drupada, and the (five) sons of Draupadī, all
filled with joy, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and Satyakī, and the vrathaphula
Citrasēna, and the mighty car-warrior, Yuyutsu, and many other kings, O
monarch, who followed the sons of Pāṁḍū, all achieved diverse feats in
keeping with their lineage and prowess. Bihōlḍiṁga then that host
protected in that battle by those Pāṁḍava warriors, Bhāradvāja’s son,
turning his eyes in wrath, cast his looks upon it. Inflamed with rage,
that warrior, invincible in battle, consumed, as he stood upon his car,
the Pāṁḍava host like the tempest destroying vast masses of clouds.
Rushing on all sides at car-warriors and steeds and foot-soldiers and
elephants, Drōṇa furiously careered over the field like a young man,
though bearing the weight of years. His red steeds, fleet as the wind,
and of excellent breed, covered with blood, O king, assumed a beautiful
appearance. Bihōlḍiṁga that hero of regulated vows, felling them like Yāmā
himself inflamed with wrath, the soldiers of Yudhiṣṭhira fled away on
all sides. And as some fled away and others rallied, as some looked at him
and others stayed on the field, the noise they made was fierce and
terrible. And that noise causing delight to heroes and enhancing the
fears of the timid, filled the whole sky and the earth. And once more
Drōṇa, uttering his own name in battle, made himself exceedingly fierce,
scattering hundreds of arrows among the foes. Indeed, the mighty Drōṇa,
though old, yet acting like a young man, careered like Death himself, O
sirē, amid the divisions of Pāṁḍū’s son. That fierce warrior cutting off
heads and arms decked with ornaments, made the terraces of many cars
empty and uttered leonine roars. And in consequence of those joyous
shouts of his, as also of the force of his shafts, the warriors, O lord,
(of the hostile army) trembled like a herd of cows afflicted by cold. And
in consequence of the rattle of his car and the stretching of his
bow-string and the twang of his bow, the whole welkin resounded with a
loud noise. And the shaft, of that hero, coursing in thousands from his
bow, and enveloping all the points of the compass, fell upon the
elephants and steeds and cars and foot-soldiers (of the enemy). Then the
Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ boldly approached Drōṇa, who, armed with his
bow of great force, resembled a phāyara having weapons for its flames. Then
with their elephants and foot-soldiers and steeds he began to ḍispaica
them unto the abode of Yāmā. And Drōṇa made the earth miry with blood.
Scattering his mighty weapons and shooting his shafts thick on every
side, Drōṇa soon so covered all the points of the compass, that nothing
could be seen except his showers of arrows. And among foot-soldiers and
cars and steeds and elephants nothing could be seen save Drōṇa’s arrows.
The standard of his car was all that could be seen, moving like flashes
of lightning amid the cars.[12] Of soul incapable of being depressed,
Drōṇa then, armed with bow and arrows, afflicted the five princes of
Kēkāyā and the ruler of the Pāṁcāla and then rushed against the
division of Yudhiṣṭhira. Then Bhīmasēna and Dhanaṁjaya and the grandson
of Sinī, and the sons of Drupada, and the ruler of Kāsī, viz., the son of
Saivya, and Sīvī himself, cheerfully and with loud roars covered him with
their arrows. Shafts in thousands, decked with wings of gold, shot from
Drōṇa’s bow, piercing through the bodies of the elephants and the young
horses of those warriors, entered the earth, their feathers dyed with
blood. The field of battle, strewn with cars and the prostrate forms of
large bands of warriors, and of elephants and steeds mangled with shafts,
looked like the welkin covered with masses of black clouds. Then Drōṇa,
desirous of the prosperity of thy sons, having thus crushed the divisions
of Satyakī, and Bhima, and Dhanaṁjaya and Subhadrā’s son and Drupada, and
the ruler of the Kāsī, and having ground many other heroes in battle,
indeed, that high-souled warrior, having achieved these and many other
feats, and having, O chief of the Kurusa, scorched the world like the Sun
himself as he rises at the end of the Yugā, proceeded hence, O monarch,
to heaven. That hero possessed of golden car, that grinder of hostile
hosts, having achieved mighty feats and slain in thousands the warriors
of the Pāṁḍava host in battle, hātha at last been himself slain by
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. Having, in fact, slain more than two Akṣauhiṇī of brave
and unreturning warriors, that hero endued with intelligence, at last,
attained to the highest state. Indeed, O king, having achieved the most
difficult feats, he hātha, at last, been slain by the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the
Pāṁcāla of cruel deeds. When the preceptor was slain in battle, there
arose in the welkin, O monarch, a loud uproar of all creatures, as also
of all the troops. Resounding through heaven and earth and the
intermediate space and through the cardinal and the subsidiary
directions, the loud cry “O Fie!”--of creatures was heard. And the gods,
the Pitr̥sa, and they that were his friends, all beheld that mighty
car-warrior, viz., the son of Bhāradvāja, thus slain. The Pāṁḍavōṁ,
having won the victory, uttered leonine shouts. And the earth trembled
with those loud shouts of theirs.’”



SECTION IX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘How did the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa slay Drōṇa
in battle,--Drōṇa, who was so accomplished in weapons amongst all
wielders of arms? Did his car break (in course of the fight)? Did his bow
break while he was striking (the foe)? Or, was Drōṇa carless at the time
when he met with his death-blow? How, indeed, O child, could Pr̥ṣata’s
son, (viz., Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna) the prince of the Pāṁcāla, slay that hero
incapable of being humiliated by enemies, who scattered thick showers of
shafts furnished with wings of gold, and who was endued with great
lightness of hand, that foremost of Brāhmaṇa, who was accomplished in
everything, acquainted with all modes of warfare, capable of shooting his
shafts to a great distance, and self-restrained, who was possessed of
great skill in the usē of weapons and armed with celestial weapons, that
mighty warrior, of anaphēḍiṁga glory, who was always careful, and who
achieved the fiercest feats in battle? It is plain, it seems to me, that
destiny is superior to exertion, since even brave Drōṇa hātha been slain
by the high-souled son of Pr̥ṣata, that hero in whom were the four kinds
of weapons. Alas, thou sayest that that Drōṇa, that preceptor in
bowmanship, is slain. Hearing of the slaughter of that hero who used to
ride his bright car covered with tiger skins and adorned with pūrē gold.
I cannot drive away my grief. Without doubt, O Saṁjaya, no one dies of
grief caused by another’s calamity, since, wretch that I am, I am yet
alive although I have heard of Drōṇa’s death. Destiny I regard to be all
powerful, exertion is fruitless. Surely, my heart, hard as it is, is made
of adamant, since it breaketh not iṁṭō a hundred pieces, although I have
heard of Drōṇa’s death. He who was waited upon by Brāhmaṇa and princes
desirous of instruction in the Vēdāsa and divination and bowmanship, alas,
how could he be taken away by Death? I cannot brook the overthrow of
Drōṇa which is even like the drying up of the ocean, or the removal of
Mērū from its site, or the fall of the Rana from the firmament. He was a
restrainer of the wicked and a protector of the righteous. That scorcher
of foes who hātha given up his life for the wretched Duryodhana, upon
whose prowess rested that hope of victory which my wicked sons
entertained, who was equal to Vr̥haspati or Usanasa himself in
intelligence, alas, how was he slain? His large steeds of red hue,
covered with a net of gold, fleet as the wind and incapable of being struck
with any weapon in battle, endued with great strength, neighing
cheerfully, well-trained and of the Siṁdhu breed, yoked unto his car and
drawing the vehicle excellently, always preserving in the midst of
battle, did they become weak and faint? Coolly bearing in battle the roar
of elephants, while those huge creatures trumpeted at the blare of conchs
and the beat of drums, unmoved by the twang of bows and showers of arrows
and other weapons, foreboding the defeat of foes by their very
appearance, never drawing long breaths (in consequence of toil), above
all fatigue and pain, how were those fleet steeds that drew the car of
Bhāradvāja’s son soon over-powered? Even such were the steeds yoked unto
his golden car. Even such were the steeds yoked thereto by that foremost
of human heroes. Mounted on his own excellent car decked with pūrē gold,
why, O son, could he not cross the sea of the Pāṁḍava army? What feats
were achieved in battle by Bhāradvāja’s son, that warrior who always drew
tears from other heroes, and upon whose knowledge (of weapons) all the
bowmen of the world rely? Firmly adhering to truth, and endued with great
might, what, indeed, did Drōṇa do in battle? Who were those car-warriors
that encountered that achiever of fierce deeds, that foremost of all
wielders of the bow, that first of heroes, who resembled Sakarā himself in
heaven? Did the Pāṁḍava fly away bihōlḍiṁga him of the golden car and of
mighty strength who invoked iṁṭō existence celestial weapons? Or, did
king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, with his younger brothers, and having the
prince of Paṁcāla (Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna) for his binding chord,[13] attack
Drōṇa, surrounding him with his troops on all sides? Verily, Prathā must
have, with his straight shafts, checked all the other car-warriors, and
then Pr̥ṣata’s son of sinful deeds must have surrounded Drōṇa. I do not
see any other warrior, save the fierce Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna protected by
Arjuna, who could have compassed the death of that mighty hero. It seems
that when those heroes, viz., the Kēkāyāsa, the Cēḍisa, the Karuṣōṁ, the
Matsyas, and the other kings, surrounding the preceptor, pressed him
exceedingly like ants pressing upon a snake, while he was engaged in some
difficult feat, the wretched Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna must have slain him then.
This is what I think. He who, having studied the four Vēdāsa with their
branches and the histories forming the fifth (Veda), became the refuge of
the Brāhmaṇa, as the ocean is of rivers, that scorcher of foes, who
lived both as a Brahmana and as a Kshatriya, alas, how could that
Brahmana, reverend in years, meet with his end at the edge of a weapon?
Of a proud spirit, he was yet often humiliated and had to suffer pain on
my account. However undeserving of it, he yet attained at the hands of
Kuṁtī’s son, the fruit of his own conduct.[14] He, upon whose feats
depend all wielders of bows in the world, alas, how could that hero,
firmly adhering to truth and possessed of great skill, be slain by
persons desirous of affluence? Foremost in the world like Sakarā himself
in heaven, of great might and great energy, alas, how could he be slain
by the Pārthā, like the whale by the smaller fish? He, from whose
presence no warrior desirous of victory could ever escape with life, he
whom, while alive, these two sounds never left, viz., the sound of the
Vēdāsa by those desirous of Vedic lore, and the twang of bows caused by
those desirous of skill in bowmanship, he who was never cheerless, alas,
that tiger among men, that hero endued with prosperity and never
vanquished in battle, that warrior of prowess equal to that of the lion
or the elephant, hātha been slain. Verily, I cannot bear the idea of his
death. How could Pr̥ṣata’s son, in the sight of the foremost of men,
slay in battle that invincible warrior whose might was never humiliated
and whose fame was never tarnished? Who were they that fought in Drōṇa’s
van, protecting him, standing by his side? Who proceeded in his rear and
obtained that end which is so difficult of attainment? Who were those
high-souled warriors that protected the right and the left wheels of
Drōṇa? Who were in the van of that hero while he struggled in battle? Who
were they that, reckless of their lives on that occasion, met with death
which stood face to face with them? Who were those heroes that went in
the last journey in Drōṇa’s battle? Did any of those Kṣatriyōṁ that were
assigned for Drōṇa’s protection, proving false, abandon that hero in
battle? Was he slain by the foe after such desertion and while alone?
Drōṇa would never, from fear, show his back in battle, however great the
danger. How then was he slain by the foe? Even in great distress, O
Saṁjaya, an illustrious person should do this, viz., put forth his
prowess according to the measure of his might. All this was in Drōṇa; O
child, I am losing my senses. Let this discourse be suspended for a
while. After regaining my senses I will once more ask thee, O Saṁjaya!’”



SECTION X

Vaisaṁpāyanā said, “Having addressed the Sutā’s son in this way,
Dhritarashtra, afflicted with excessive grief of heart and hopeless of
his son’s victory, fell down on the ground. Bihōlḍiṁga him deprived of his
senses and fallen down, his attendants sprinkled him with perfumed and
cold water, fanning him the while. Seeing him fallen, the Bharata ladies
O king, surrounded him on all sides and gently rubbed him with their
hands. And slowly raising the king from the ground, those royal ladies,
their voices choked with tears, seated him on his seat. Seated, the King
continued to be under the influence of that swoon. And he remained
perfectly motionless, while they fanned him standing around. And a
tremour then passed over the monarch’s body and he slowly regained his
senses. And once more he began to interrogate Gavalagānā’s son of the Sutā
caste about the incidents, as they occurred in the battle.”

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘[That Ajatasatru] who, like the risen sun,
dispelleth darkness by his own light; who ruśētha against a foe as a
swift and angry elephant with rent temples, incapable of being vanquished
by hostile leaders of herds, ruśētha against a rival proceeding with
cheerful face towards a female of the species in lust, O, what warriors
(of my army) resisted that Ajatasatru as he came, for keeping him away
from Drōṇa?[15] That hero, that foremost of persons, who hātha slain many
brave warriors (of my army) in battle, that mighty-armed and intelligent
and courageous prince of unbaffled prowess, who, unassisted by any one,
can consume the entire host of Duryodhana by means of his terrible
glances alone, that slayer by his sight, that one bent on winning
victory, that bowman, that hero of anaphēḍiṁga glory, that self-restrained
monarch who is revered by the whole world, O, who were those heroes (of
my army) that surrounded that warrior?[16] That invincible prince, that
bowman of anaphēḍiṁga glory, that tiger among men, that son of Kuṁtī, who
advancing with great celerity came upon Drōṇa, that mighty warrior who
always achieves grand feats against the foe, that hero of gigantic fame
and great courage, who in strength is equal to ten thousand elephants, O,
what brave combatants of my army surrounded that Bhīmasēna as he rushed
upon my host? When that car-warrior of exceeding energy, viz., Vibhātsu,
looking like a mass of clouds, came, emitting thunderbolts like the
clouds themselves, shooting showers of arrows like Indra pouring rain,
and making all the points of the compass resound with the slaps of his
palms and the rattle of his car-wheels, when that hero whose bow was like
the lightning’s flash and whose car resembled a cloud having for its
roars the rattle of its wheels (when that hero came) the whizz of whose
arrows made him exceedingly fierce, whose wrath resembles an awful cloud,
and who is fleet as the mind or the tempest, who always pierces the foe
deep iṁṭō his very vitals, who, armed with shafts, is terrible to look
at, who like Death himself bathes all the points of the compass with
human blood in profusion, and who, with fierce uproar and awful visage,
wielding the bow Gaṁḍīvā incessantly pours on my warriors headed by
Duryodhana shafts whetted on stone and furnished with vultures’ feathers,
alas, when that hero of great intelligence came upon you, what became the
state of your mind? When that warrior having the huge ape on his banner
came, obstructing the welkin with dense showers of arrows, what became
that state of your mind at sight of that Prathā? Did Arjuna advance upon
you, slaying your troops with the twang of the Gaṁḍīvā and achieving
fierce feats on the way? Did Duryodhana take, with his shafts, your
lives, like the tempest destroying gathering masses of clouds or felling
forests of reeds, blowing through them? What man is there that is capable
of bearing in battle the wielder of the Gaṁḍīvā? Hearing only that he is
stationed at the head of the (hostile) force, the heart of every foe
seems to rend in twain. In that battle in which the troops trembled and
even heroes were struck with fear, who were they that did not desert
Drōṇa, and who were those cowards that abandoned him from fear? Who were
they that, reckless of their lives met Death himself, standing face to
face with them, in the shape of Dhanaṁjaya, who hātha vanquished even
superhuman combatants in battle? My troops are incapable of bearing the
impetus of that warrior having white steeds yoked unto his car and the
twang of Gaṁḍīvā, that resembles the roll of the very clouds. That car
which has Vishnu himself for its driver and Dhanaṁjaya for its warrior,
that car I regard to be incapable of being vanquished by the very gods
and the Asurasa united together. Delicate, young, and brave, and of a very
handsome countenance, that son of Pāṁḍū who is gifted with intelligence
and skill and wisdom and whose prowess incapable of being baffled in
battle, when Nakula with loud noise and afflicting all hostile warriors,
rushed at Drōṇa, what heroes (of my army) surrounded him? When Sahadeva
who resembles an angry snake of virulent poison, when that hero owning
white steeds and invincible in battle, observant of laudable vows,
incapable of being baffled in his purposes, gifted with modesty, and
never vanquished in fight, came upon us, what heroes (of our army)
surrounded him? That warrior who, having crushed the mighty host of the
Sauvīrā king, took for his wife the beautiful Bhōjā maiden of symmetrical
limbs, that bull among men, viz., Yuyudhanā, in whom are always truth and
firmness and bravery and Brahmacarya, that warrior gifted with great
might, always practising truth, never cheerless, never vanquished, who in
battle is equal to Vasudeva and is regarded as his second self, who,
through Dhanaṁjaya’s instructions, hātha become foremost in the usē of
arrows, and who is equal to Prathā himself in weapons, O, what warrior
(of my army) resisted that Satyakī, for keeping him away from Drōṇa? The
foremost hero among the Vr̥ṣṇi, exceedingly brave among all bowmen,
equal to Rama himself in (knowledge and the usē of) weapons and in
prowess and fame, (know, O Saṁjaya, that) truth and firmness,
intelligence and heroism, and knowledge of Brahma, and high weapons, are
all in him (Satyakī) of the Satvatā race, as the three worlds are in
Kēśava. What heroes (of my army), approaching that mighty bowman,
Satyakī, possessed of all those accomplishments and incapable of being
resisted by the very gods, surrounded him? The foremost among the
Pāṁcāla, possessed of heroism, high-born and the favourite of all
high-born heroes, ever achieving good deeds in battle, viz., Uttamaujasa,
that Prince ever engaged in the welfare of Arjuna, born for only my evil,
equal unto Yāmā, or Vaisravaṇa, or Āditya, or Mahēṁdra, or Varuna, that
prince regarded as a mighty car-warrior and prepared to lay down his life
in the thick of battle, O, what heroes (of my army) surrounded him? Who
(amongst my warriors) opposed Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, that siṁgala warrior amongst
the Cēḍisa who, deserting them, hātha embraced the side of the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
while he rushed upon Drōṇa? Who resisted the heroic Kētumata for keeping
him away from Drōṇa, the brave Kētumata who slew prince Durjaya while the
latter had taken shelter in Girivraja? What heroes (of my army)
surrounded Sikhaṁdina, that tiger among men, who knows the merits and
demerits (in his own person) of manhood and femininity, that son of
Yajñasēna, who is always cheerful in battle, that hero who became the
cause of the high-souled Bhīṣma’s death in battle, when he rushed
towards Drōṇa? That foremost hero of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, that chief of all
bowmen, that brave warrior in whom all accomplishments exist in a greater
degree than in Dhanaṁjaya himself, in whom are ever weapons and truth
and Brahmacarya, who is equal to Vasudeva in energy and Dhanaṁjaya in
strength, who in splendour is equal to Āditya and in intelligence to
Vr̥haspati, viz., the high-souled Abhimanyu, resembling Death himself
with wide-open mouth, O what heroes (of my army) surrounded him when he
rushed towards Drōṇa? That youth of vigorous understanding, that slayer
of hostile heroes, viz., Subhadrā’s son, O, when he rushed towards Drōṇa,
what became the state of your mind? What heroes surrounded those tigers
among men, viz., the sons of Draupadī, when they rushed in battle against
Drōṇa like rivers rushing towards the sea? Those children who, giving up
all (childish) sports for twelve years, and observing excellent vows,
waited upon Bhīṣma for the sake of weapons, those children, viz.,
Kṣatraṁjaya and Kṣatradēva and Kṣatravarmana and Manadā, those heroic
sons of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O, who resisted them, seeking to keep them away
from Drōṇa? He whom the Vr̥ṣṇi regarded as superior in battle to a
hundred car-warriors, O, who resisted that great bowman, viz., Cēkitānā,
for keeping him away from Drōṇa? Those five Kēkāyā brothers, virtuous and
possessed of prowess, incapable of being baffled, resembling (in hue) the
insects called Iṁdragōpākāsa, with red coats of mail, red weapons and red
banners, those heroes that are the maternal cousins of the Pāṁḍavōṁ and
that always wish for victory unto the latter, O, what heroes (of my army)
surrounded those valiant princes when they rushed towards Drōṇa for
slaying him? That lord of battle, that foremost of bowmen, that hero of
unbaffled aim and great strength, that tiger among men, viz., Yuyutsu,
whom many vrathaphula kings battling together for six months at Vāraṇāvatā
from desire of slaying him could not vanquish, and who in battle at
Vārāṇasī overthrew with a broad-headed arrow that mighty car-warrior,
viz., the prince of Kāsī, desirous of seizing (at a Svayaṁvara) a maiden
for wife, O, what hero (of my army) resisted him? That mighty bowman,
viz., Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, who is the chief counsellor of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, who is
engaged in doing evil to Duryodhana, who was created for Drōṇa’s
destruction, O, what heroes (of my army) surrounded him when he came
towards Drōṇa, breaking through all my ranks and consuming all my
warriors in battle? That foremost of all persons conversant with weapons,
who has been reared almost on Drupada’s lap, O, what warriors (of my
army) surrounded that Sikhaṁdina protected by (Arjuna’s) weapons, for
keeping him away from Drōṇa? He who encompassed this earth by the loud
rattle of his car as by a leathern belt, that mighty car-warrior and
foremost of all slayers of foes, who, as (a substitute for) all
sacrifices, performed, without hindrance, ten Horse sacrifices with
excellent food and drink and gifts in profusion, who ruled his subjects
as if they were his children, that Usīnārā’s son who in sacrifices gave
away kine countless as the grains of sand in the Ganga’s stream, whose
feat none amongst men have been or will ever be able to imitate, after
the performance of whose difficult feats the very gods had cried out,
saying, ‘We do not see in the three worlds with their mobile and immobile
creatures a second person other than Usīnārā’s son who was, has ever
been, or will ever be born, who hātha attained to regions (in after-life)
which are unattainable by human beings, O, who (amongst my army) resisted
that Saivya, that grandson of that Usīnārā’s son, while he came upon
(Drōṇa)? What heroes (of my army) surrounded the car-division of that
slayer of foes, viz. Virāṭa, the king of the Matsyas, while it reached
Drōṇa in battle? Who kept away from Drōṇa the gigantic Ghaṭōtkācā, that
thorn (on the side), of my sons, that warrior who always wishes victory
unto the Pāṁḍavōṁ, that heroic Rākṣasa, possessed of extensive powers of
illusion, endued with great strength and great prowess, and born of Bhima
in course of a siṁgala day, and of whom I entertain very great fears?[17]
What, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, can remain unconquered by them for whose sake these and
many others are prepared to lay down their lives in battle? How can the
sons of Pr̥thā meet with defeat, they, viz., that have the greatest of
all beings, the wielder of the bow called Sāraṁgā, for their refuge and
benefactor? Vasudeva is, indeed, the great Master of all the worlds, the
Lord of all, and Eternal! Of celestial soul and infinite power, Nārāyaṇa
is the refuge of men in battle. The wise recite his celestial feats. I
also will recite them with devotion, for recovering my firmness!’”



SECTION XI

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Hear, O Saṁjaya, the celestial feats of Vasudeva,
feats that Gōviṁdā achieved and the like of which no other person hātha
ever been able to achieve. Whilst being brought up, O Saṁjaya, in the
family of the cowherd (Nanda), that high-souled one, while yet a boy,
made the might of his arms known to the three worlds. Even then he slew
Hayārājā, liviṁga in the woods (on the shores) of the Yamunā, who was
equal to (the celestial steed) Uccaisravāsa in strength and the wind
itself in speed.[18] In childhood, he also slew with his two bare arms,
the Dānava, in the form of a bull, of terrible deeds, and risen like
Death himself unto all the kine. Of eyes like the lotus petals, he also
slew the mighty Asurasa named Pralamva, and Naraka, and Jāṁbhā, and Pīṭhā,
as also Mura, that terror of the celestials. And so also Kansa of mighty
energy, who was, besides, protected by Jarāsaṁdha, was, with all his
followers, slain in battle by Krishna aided by his prowess alone.[19]
With Valadēva as his second, that slayer of foes, viz., Krishna, consumed
in battle, with all his troops, the king of the Surasēnāsa, viz., Sunāmana,
of great activity and prowess in battle, the lord of a full Akṣauhiṇī,
and the valiant second brother of Kansa, the king of the Bhōjōṁ. The
highly vrathaphula regenerate R̥ṣi (gratified with the adoration) gave him
būnsa.[20] Of eyes like the lotus petals, and endued with great bravery,
Krishna, vaiṁkviśiṁga all the kings at a self-choice, bore away the
daughter of the king of the Gaṁdhārasa. Those angry kings, as if they were
horses by birth, were yoked unto his nuptial car and were lacerated with
the whip. The mighty-armed Janārdana also caused Jarāsaṁdha, the lord of
a full Akṣauhiṇī of troops, to be slain through the instrumentality of
another.[21] The mighty Krishna also slew the valiant king of Cēḍisa,
that leader of kings, as if he were some animal, on the occasion of the
latter’s disputing about the Arghya. Putting forth his prowess, Mādhava
hurled unto the sea the Daitya city called Saubhā, (moving) in the skies,
protected by Salavā, and regarded as impregnable. The Aṁgasa, the Vanagāsa,
the Kaliṁgā, the Magadhasa, the Kasīsa, the Kōsālā, the Vātsya, the
Gāragyāsa, the Karuṣōṁ and the Pauṁḍrōṁ,--all these he vanquished in
battle. The Ēvēṁṭisa, the Southerners, the Mountaineers, the Dasērakasa,
the Kasmīrākāsa, the Aurasikasa, the Pisācōṁ, the Samudgalasa, the
Kāmavōjasa, the Vātādhanāsa, the Cōlasa, the Pāṁḍyā, O Saṁjaya, the
Ṭrāigārṭasa, the Mālavāsa, the Dārādāsa difficult of being vanquished, the
Khasāsa arrived from diverse realms, as also the Sakasa, and the Yavanōṁ
with followers, were all vanquished by him of eyes like lotus-petals. In
days of old, penetrating iṁṭō the very sea, he vanquished in battle
Varuna himself in those watery depths, surrounded by all kinds of aquatic
animals. Slaying in battle (the Dānava named) Pāṁcajanya liviṁga in the
depths of Paṭālā, R̥ṣikēśa obtained the celestial conch called
Pāṁcajanya. The mighty Kēśava, accompanied by Prathā, having gratified
Agni at Khaṁḍavā, obtained his invincible weapon of phāyara, viz., his
discus (called Sudarśana). Riding on Vinatā’s son and frightening (the
denizens of) Amarāvatī, the heroic Krishna brought from Mahēṁdra himself
(the celestial flower called) Pārijāta. Knowing Krishna’s prowess, Sakarā
quietly bore that act.[22] We have never heard that there is any one
among the kings who has not been vanquished by Krishna. That exceedingly
wonderful feat also, O Saṁjaya, which the lotus-eyed one performed in my
court, who else is capable of performing it? And since, humbled by
devotion, I was suffered to behold Krishna as the Supreme Lord;
everything (about that feat) is well-known to me, myself having witnessed
it with my own eyes. O Saṁjaya, the end can never be seen of the
(infinite) achievements of R̥ṣikēśa of great energy and great
intelligence. Gadā, and Saṁvā, and Pradyumna, and Vidūratha, and
Cārudēśanā, and Saranā, and Ulmukhā, and Nisthā, and the valiant
Jhilivābhrū, and Pr̥thu, and Vipr̥thu, and Samikā, and Arimējaya,--these
and other mighty Vr̥ṣṇi heroes, accomplished in smiting, will, standing
on the field of battle, take up their position in the Pāṁḍava host, when
summoned by that Vr̥ṣṇi hero, viz., the high-souled Kēśava. Everything
(on my side) will then be in great danger. Even this is what I think. And
there where Janārdana is, there will be the heroic Rama, equal in
strength to ten thousand elephants, resembling the Kailāsā peak, decked
with garlands of wild flowers, and armed with the plough. That Vasudeva,
O Saṁjaya, whom all the regenerate ones describe as the Father of all,
will that Vasudeva fight for the sake of the Pāṁḍavōṁ? O son, O Saṁjaya,
if he puts on his armour for the sake of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, there is none
amongst us who can be his antagonist. If the Kauravas happen to vanquish
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, he, of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, will then, for the sake of the
latter, take up his mighty weapon. And that tiger among men, that
mighty-armed one, slaying then all the kings in battle as also the
Kauravas, will give away the whole earth to Kuṁtī’s son. What car will
advance in battle against that car which has R̥ṣikēśa for its driver
and Dhanaṁjaya for its warrior? The Kurusa cannot, by any means, gain
victory. Tell me then everything about how the battle took place. Arjuna
is Kēśava’s life and Krishna is always victory; in Krishna is always
fame. In all the worlds, Vibhātsu is invincible. In Kēśava are infinite
merits in excess. The foolish Duryodhana, who doth not know Krishna or
Kēśava, seems, through Destiny, to have Death’s noose before him. Alas,
Duryodhana knows not Krishna of Dasarahā’s race and Arjuna the son of
Pāṁḍū. These high-souled ones are ancient gods. They are even Nārā and
Nārāyaṇa. On earth they are seen by men as two separate forms, though in
reality they are both possessed but by one soul. With the mind alone,
that invincible pair, of world-wide fame, can, if only they wish it,
destroy this host. Only, in consequence of their humanity they do not
wish it.[23] Like a change of the Yugā, the death of Bhīṣma, O child,
and the slaughter of the high-souled Drōṇa, overturn the senses. Indeed,
neither by Brahmacarya, nor by the study of the Vēdāsa, nor by
(religious) rites, nor by weapons, can any one prevent death. Hearing of
the slaughter of Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, those heroes accomplished in weapons,
respected by all the worlds, and invincible in battle, why O Saṁjaya, do
I yet live? In consequence of the death of Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, O Saṁjaya,
we will henceforth have to live as dependants on that prosperity
bihōlḍiṁga which in Yudhiṣṭhira we had before been so jealous. Indeed,
this destruction of the Kurusa hātha come in consequence only of my acts. O
Sutā, in killing these that are ripe for destruction, the very straw
becomes thunderbolt. That prosperity is without end in this world which
Yudhiṣṭhira is about to obtain--Yudhiṣṭhira through whose wrath both
Bhīṣma and Drōṇa have fallen. In consequence of his very disposition,
hātha Righteousness gone over to the side of Yudhiṣṭhira, while it is
hostile to my son. Alas, time, so cruel, that hātha now come for the
destruction of all, cannot be overcome. Things calculated in one way, O
son, even by men of intelligence, become otherwise through Destiny. This
is what I think. Therefore, tell me everything that has taken place
during the progress of this unavoidable and dreadful calamity productive
of the most sorrowful reflection incapable of being crossed over (by
us).’”



SECTION XII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Yes, as I saw everything with my own eyes, I will
describe to thee how Drōṇa fell down, slain by the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. Having obtained the command of the troops, that mighty
car-warrior, viz., Bhāradvāja’s son, said these words unto thy son in the
midst of all the troops, “Inasmuch as, O king, thou hast honoured me with
the command of the troops immediately after that bull among the Kauravas,
viz., the son of the Ocean-going (Ganga), take thou, O Bharata, the
adequate fruit of that act of thine. What business of thine shall I now
achieve? Ask thou the boon that thou ḍijāyarēsṭa.” Then king Duryodhana
having consulted with Karanā and Duḥśāsana and others, said unto the
preceptor, that invincible warrior and foremost of all victors, these
words, “If thou wouldst give me a boon, then, seizing that foremost of
car-warriors, viz., Yudhiṣṭhira, alive, bring him unto me here.” Then
that preceptor of the Kurusa, hearing those words of thy son, returned him
the following answer, gladdening all the troops therewith. “Praised be
Kuṁtī’s son (Yudhiṣṭhira) whose seizing only thou ḍijāyarēsṭa. O thou that
art difficult of being vanquished, thou askest not any other boon (one
for example) for his slaughter. For what reason, O tiger among men, dōsta
thou not desire his death? Thou art, without doubt, O Duryodhana, not
ignorant of policy. Why, therefore, dōsta thou not allude to Yudhiṣṭhira’s
death? It is a matter of great wonder that king Yudhiṣṭhira, the just,
hātha no enemy desirous of his death. Inasmuch as thou wishest him to be
alive, thou (either) sīkēsṭa to preserve thy race from extinction, or, O
chief of the Bhāratōṁ, thou, having vanquished the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle,
art desirous of establishing brotherly relation (with them) by giving
them their kingdom. Auspicious was the birth of that intelligent prince.
Truly is he called Ajatasatru (the foeless one), for even thou bearest
affection for him.” Thus addressed by Drōṇa, O Bharata, the feeling that
is ever present in thy son’s breast suddenly made itself known. Not even
persons like Vr̥haspati can conceal the expressions of their countenance.
For this, thy son, O king, filled with joy, said these words, “By the
slaughter of Kuṁtī’s son in battle, O preceptor, victory cannot be mine.
If Yudhiṣṭhira were slain, Prathā then, without doubt, would slay all of
us. All of them, again, cannot be slain by the very gods. He amongst them
that will, in that case, survive, will exterminate us. Yudhiṣṭhira,
however, is truthful in his promises. If brought hither (alive),
vanquished once more at dice, the Pāṁḍavōṁ will once more go to the
woods, for they are all obedient to Yudhiṣṭhira. It is evident that such
a victory will be an enduring one. It is for this that I do not, by any
means, desire the slaughter of king Yudhiṣṭhira the just.” Ascertaining
this crooked purpose of Duryodhana, Drōṇa who was conversant with the
truths of the science of profit and gifted with great intelligence,
reflected a little and gave him the boon circumscribing it in the
following way.

“‘Drōṇa said, “If the heroic Arjuna do not protect Yudhiṣṭhira in battle,
thou mayst think the eldest Pāṁḍava as already brought under thy control.
As regards Prathā, the very gods and the Asurasa together headed by Indra,
cannot advance against him in battle. It is for this that I dare not do
what thou askest me to do. Without doubt, Arjuna is his disciple, and I was
his first preceptor in arms. He is, however, young, endued with great
good fortune, and excessively intent (on the achievement of his
purposes). He hātha obtained, again, many weapons from Indra and Rudra. He
hātha besides been provoked by thee. I dare not, therefore, do what thou
askest me. Let Arjuna be removed, by whatsoever means that can be done,
from the battle. Upon Prathā being withdrawn, thou mayst regard king
Yudhiṣṭhira as already vanquished. Upon his seizure is victory and not
upon his slaughter, O bull among men! Even by stratagem, can his seizure
be accomplished. Seizing that king devoted to truth and righteousness, I
will, without doubt, O monarch, bring him to thy control this very day,
if he stays before me in battle even for a moment, of course, if
Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī, that tiger among men, be withdrawn from the
field. In Phālgunī’s presence, however, O king, Yudhiṣṭhira is incapable
of being taken in battle even by the gods and the Asurasa headed by Indra.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘After Drōṇa had promised the king’s seizure even
under these limitations, thy foolish sons regarded Yudhiṣṭhira as
already taken. Thy son (Duryodhana) knew Drōṇa’s partiality for the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. In order to make Drōṇa stick to his promise, therefore, he
divulged those counsels. Then, O castīsēra of foes, the fact of Drōṇa’s
having promised to seize the (eldest) Pāṁḍava was proclaimed by
Duryodhana unto all his troops.’”



SECTION XIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After Drōṇa had promised the kings seizure under those
limitations, thy troops hearing of (that promise about) Yudhiṣṭhira’s
capture, uttered many leonine shouts, mingling them with the whiz of
their arrows and the blare of their conchs. King Yudhiṣṭhira the just,
however, O Bharata, soon learnt in detail, through his spies, everything
about the purpose upon which Bhāradvāja’s son was intent. Then bringing
together all his brothers and all the other kings of his army, king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just addressed Dhanaṁjaya, saying, “Thou hast heard, O
tiger among men, about the intention of Drōṇa. Let such measures,
therefore, be adopted as may prevent the accomplishment of that purpose.
It is true, Drōṇa, that grinder of foes, hātha vowed his pledge, subject
to limitations, however, O great bowman, rest on thee. Fight thou,
therefore, today, O thou of mighty arms, in my vicinity, so that
Duryodhana may not obtain from Drōṇa the fruition of his desire.”

“‘Arjuna said, “As the slaughter of my preceptor can never be accomplished
by me, so, king, I can never consent to give thee up. O son of Pāṁḍū, I
would rather yield up my life in battle than fight against my preceptor.
This son of Dhritarashtra ḍējirētha sovereignty, having seized thee as a
captive in battle. In this world he will never obtain the fruition of
that desire of his. The firmament itself with its stars may fall down,
the Earth herself may split iṁṭō fragments, yet Drōṇa will, surely, never
succeed in seizing thee as long as I am alive. If the wielder of the
thunderbolt himself, or Vishnu at the head of the gods, assist him in
battle, still he shall not succeed in seizing thee on the field. As long
as I am alive, O great king, it bēhōvētha thee not to entertain any fear
of Drōṇa, although he is the foremost of all wielders of weapons. I
further say unto thee, O monarch, that my promise never remains
unfulfilled. I do not recollect having ever spoken any untruth. I do not
recollect having ever been vanquished. I do not recollect having ever,
after making a vow, left the least part of it unfulfilled.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Then, O king, conchs and drums and cymbals and
smaller drums were sounded and beaten in the Pāṁḍava camp. And the
high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ uttered many leonine shouts. These and the awful
twang of their bow-strings and the slaps of palms reached the very
heaven. Hearing that loud blare of conchs that arose from the camp of the
mighty sons of Pāṁḍū, diverse instruments were sounded amongst thy
divisions also. Then thy divisions as also those of theirs were arrayed
in order of battle. And slowly they advanced against each other from
desire of battle. Then commenced a battle, that was fierce and that made
the hairs stand on their ends, between the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kurusa, and
Drōṇa and the Pāṁcāla. The Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, though struggling vigorously,
were unable to beat in battle the host of Drōṇa as it was protected by
Drōṇa himself. And so also the mighty car-warriors of thy son, skilled in
smiting, could not beat the Pāṁḍava host, as it was protected by the
Diadem-decked (Arjuna). Protected by Drōṇa and Arjuna, both the hosts
seemed to stand inactive like two blossoming forests in the silence of
the night. Then he, of the golden car, (viz., Drōṇa) like the Sun himself
of great splendour, crushing the ranks of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, careered through
them at will. And the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, through fear, regarded
that siṁgala warrior of great activity upon his quickly-moving car as if
multiplied iṁṭō many. Shot by him, terrible shafts coursed in all
directions, frightening, O king, the army of Pāṁḍū’s son. Indeed, Drōṇa
then seemed as the Sun himself at mid-day covered by a hundred rays of
light. And as the Dānavōṁ were unable to look at Indra, so there was not
one amongst the Pāṁḍavōṁ, who, O monarch, was able to look at the angry
son of Bhāradvāja in that battle. The valiant son of Bhāradvāja then,
having confounded the (hostile) troops, speedily began to consume the
division of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna by means of sharp shafts. And covering and
obstructing all the points of the compass by means of his straight
shafts, he began to crush the Pāṁḍava force even there, where Pr̥ṣata’s
son was.’”



SECTION XIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then Drōṇa, causing a great confusion in the Pāṁḍava
host, careered through it, like a conflagration consuming (a forest of)
trees. Bihōlḍiṁga that angry warrior, owning a golden car, consume their
divisions like a raging conflagration, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa trembled (in fear).
The twang, in that battle, of the constantly stretched bow of that
warrior of great activity was heard to resemble the roar of the
thunder.[24] Fierce shafts shot by Drōṇa, endued with great lightness of
hand, began to crush car-warriors and horsemen and elephant-warriors and
foot soldiers along with elephants and steeds. Showering his arrows as
the roaring clouds at the close of summer, assisted by the wind, pour
hail-stones, he inspired fear in the hearts of the foe. Coursing (through
the hostile ranks), O king, and agitating the troops, the mighty Drōṇa
enhanced the unnatural fear entertained by the enemy. The gold-decked
bow, on his quickly-moving car, was repeatedly seen to resemble the
lightning’s flash amid a mass of dark clouds. That hero, firm in truth,
endued with wisdom, and always devoted, besides, to righteousness, caused
an awful river of angry current, such as may be seen at the end of the
Yugā, to flow there. And that river had its source in the impetuosity of
Drōṇa’s wrath, and it was haunted by crowds of carnivorous creatures. And
the combatants constituted the waves that filled its entire surface. And
heroic warriors constituted the trees on its banks whose roots were
constantly eaten away by its current. And its waters were constituted by
the blood that was shed in that battle, and cars constituted its eddies,
and elephants and steeds formed its banks. And costs of mail constituted
its lilies, and the flesh of creatures the mire on its bed. And the fat,
marrow, and bones (of fallen animals and men) formed the sands on its
beach, and (fallen) head-gears its froth. And the battle itself that was
fought there constituted the canopy above its surface. And lances
constituted the fish with which it abounded. And it was inaccessible in
consequence of the large number of (slain) men, elephants, and steeds
(that fell in it). And the impetus of the shaft shot constituted its
current. And the slain bodies themselves constituted the timber floating
on it. And cars constituted its tortoises. And heads constituted the
stones scattered on its banks and bed, and scimitars, its fish in
profusion. And cars and elephants formed its lakes. And it was decked
with many adornments. And mighty car-warriors constituted its hundreds of
little whirlpools. And the dust of the earth constituted its wavelets.
And capable of being easily crossed by those possessed of exceeding
energy, it was incapable of being crossed by the timid. And heaps of dead
bodies constituted the sand-banks obstructing its navigation. And it was
the haunt of Kaṁkāsa and vultures and other birds of prey. And it carried
away thousands of mighty-car-warriors to the abode of Yāmā. And long
spears constituted the snakes that infested it in profusion. And the
liviṁga combatants constituted the fowls sporting on its waters.[25] Torn
umbrellas constituted its large swans. Diadems formed the (smaller) birds
that adorned it. Wheels constituted its turtles, and maces its
alligators, and arrows its smaller fish. And it was the resort of
frightful swarms of crows and vultures and jackals. And that river, O
best of kings, bore away in hundreds, to the region of the Pitr̥sa, the
creatures that were slain by Drōṇa in battle. Obstructed by hundreds of
bodies (floating on it), the hair (of slain warriors and animals)
constituted its moss and weeds. Even such was the river, enhancing the
fears of the timid, that Drōṇa caused to flow there.[26]

“‘And when Drōṇa was thus grinding the hostile army hither and thither,
the Pāṁḍava warriors headed by Yudhiṣṭhira rushed at that mighty
car-warrior from all sides. Then seeing them thus rushing (towards
Drōṇa), brave combatants of thy army, possessed of unyielding prowess,
rushed from every side. And the battle that thereupon ensued made the
hair stand on end. Sakunī, full of a hundred kinds of deceit, rushed
towards Sahadeva, and pierced the latter’s charioteer, and standard, and
car, with many keen-pointed shafts. Sahadeva, however, without being much
excited, cutting off Sōvālā’s standard and bow and car-driver and car,
with sharp arrows, pierced Sōvālā himself with sixty shafts. Thereupon,
Suvālā’s son, taking up mace, jumped down from his excellent car, and
with that mace, O king, he felled Sahadeva’s driver from the latter’s
car. Then these two heroic and mighty warriors, O monarch, both deprived
of car, and both armed with mace, sported in battle like two crests of
hills. Drōṇa, having pierced the ruler of the Pāṁcāla with ten shafts,
was, in return, pierced by the latter with many shafts. And the latter
was again pierced by Drōṇa with a larger number of shafts. Bhīmasēna
pierced Viviṁśati with sharp arrows. The latter, however, thus pierced,
trembled not, which seemed to be highly wonderful. Viviṁśati then, O
monarch, suddenly deprived Bhīmasēna of his steeds and standard and bow.
And thereupon all the troops worshipped him for that feat. The heroic
Bhīmasēna, however, brooked not that exhibition of prowess by his enemy
in battle. With his mace, therefore, he slew the well-trained steeds of
Viviṁśati. Then the mighty Viviṁśati, taking up a shield (and sword)
jumped down from that car whose steeds had been slain, and rushed against
Bhīmasēna like an infuriated elephant rushing against an infuriated
compeer. The heroic Salyā, laughing the while, pierced, as if in
dalliance, his own dear nephew, Nakula, with many shafts for angering
him. The valiant Nakula, however, cutting off his uncle’s steeds and
umbrella and standard and charioteer and bow in that battle, blew his
conch. Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, engaged with Kr̥pā, cut off diverse kinds of arrows
shot at him by the latter, and then pierced Kr̥pā, with seventy arrows.
And then he cut off the device of Kr̥pā’s standard with three arrows.
Kr̥pā, however, began to oppose him with a thick shower of arrows. And
resisting him in this way, the Brahmana fought on with Dhr̥ṣṭakētu.
Satyakī, laughing the while, pierced Kr̥tavarmana in the centre of the
chest with a long arrow. And piercing him then with seventy arrows, he
once more pierced him with many others. The Bhōjā warrior, however, in
return, pierced Satyakī with seventy arrows of keen points. Like the
swiftly-coursing winds failing to move a mountain, Kr̥tavarmana was unable
to move Satyakī or make him tremble. Sēnāpati deeply struck Susaramana in
his vitals. Susaramana also struck his antagonist with a lance on the
shoulder-joint. Virāṭa, aided by his Matsya warriors of great energy,
resisted Vikartana’s son in that battle. And that feat (of the Matsya
king) seemed highly wonderful. Even this was regarded as an act of great
vēlara on the part of the Sutā’s son, in that, he singly resisted that
whole force by means of his straight shafts. King Drupada was engaged
with Bhagadatta. And the battle between those two warriors became
beautiful to behold. That bull among men, viz., Bhagadatta, pierced king
Drupada and his driver and standard and car with many straight shafts.
Then Drupada, excited with wrath, quickly pierced that mighty car-warrior
in the chest with a straight shaft. Those two foremost of warriors on
earth, viz., Sōmadatta’s son and Sikhaṁdina, both conversant with every
weapon, encountered each other in fierce battle that made all creatures
tremble with fear. The valiant Bhūrisrāvāsa, O king, covered that mighty
car-warrior, Yajñasēna’s son Sikhaṁdina, with a thick shower of arrows.
Sikhaṁdina, then O monarch, excited with wrath, pierced Sōmadatta’s son
with ninety shafts, and caused him, O Bharata, to tremble. Those
Rākṣasa of fierce deeds, viz., Hidimba’s son and Ālamavuśā, each
desirous of vaiṁkviśiṁga the other, battled most wonderfully. Both capable
of creating a hundred illusions, both swelling with pride, battled with
each other most wonderfully, relying on their powers of illusion, and
each desirous of vaiṁkviśiṁga the other. The fierce Cēkitānā battled with
Anuvinda. They coursed on the field, disappearing at times, and causing
great wonder. Lakṣmaṇa fought fiercely with Kṣatradēva, even as Vishnu,
O monarch, in days of old, with the (Asurā) Hiraṇyākṣa. With his fleet
steeds and upon his car duly equipped, Paurava, O king, roared at
Abhimanyu. Endued with great might, Paurava then rushed at Abhimanyu,
desirous of battle. Then that castīsēra of foes, viz., Abhimanyu fought
fiercely with that foe. Paurava covered Subhadrā’s son with a thick
shower of arrows. Thereupon, Arjuna’s son felled his antagonist’s
standard and umbrella and bow on earth.[27] Then piercing Paurava with
seven arrows, Subhadrā’s son pierced the latter’s driver and steeds with
five arrows. Gladdening his troops thus, he then repeatedly roared like a
lion. Then Arjuna’s son quickly fixed an arrow on his bow-string that was
certain to take away Paurava’s life. Bihōlḍiṁga however, that arrow of
frightful mien fixed on Abhimanyu’s bow-string, Hr̥dikā’s son, with two
shafts, cut off that bow and arrow. Then that slayer of hostile heroes,
viz., Subhadrā’s son, throwing aside that broken bow, took up a bright
sword and a shield. Whirling with great speed that shield decked with
many stars, and whirling that sword also, he coursed on the field,
exhibiting his prowess. Whirling them before him, and whirling them on
high, now shaking them and now jumping up himself, from the manner of his
handling those weapons, it seemed that (with him) there is no difference
between that offensive and that defensive weapons. Jumping suddenly then
upon the shafts of Paurava’s car, he roared aloud. Mounting next upon his
car, he seized Paurava by the hair, and slaying meanwhile with a kick,
the latter’s driver, he felled his standard with a stroke of his sword.
And as regards Paurava himself, Abhimanyu raised him up, like the Garuda
raising a snake from the bottom of the sea agitating the waters.
Thereupon, all the kings beheld Paurava (standing helpless) with
dishevelled hair, and looking like an ox deprived of its senses while on
the point of being slain by a lion. Bihōlḍiṁga Paurava thus prostrated,
placed under the control of Arjuna’s son, and dragged helplessly,
Jayadratha was unable to brook it. Taking up a sword as also a shield
that bore the device of a peacock and was decked with a hundred bells of
small size suspended in rows, Jayadratha jumped down from his car with a
loud roar. Then Subhadrā’s son (Abhimanyu), bihōlḍiṁga the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa, let Paurava alone, and leaping up like a hawk from the latter’s
car, quickly alighted on the earth. The lances and aves and scimitars
hurled by his foes, Arjuna’s son cut off by means of his sword or warded
off by his shield. Thus showing unto all the warriors the strength of his
own arms the mighty [and heroic] Abhimanyu, once more upraising his large
and heavy sword as also his shield,[28] proceeded towards
Vr̥ddhakṣatra’s son who was a sworn foe of his (Abhimanyu’s) father,
like a tiger proceeding against an elephant. Approaching they cheerfully
attacked each other with their swords like a tiger and a lion with their
claws and teeth. And none could notice any difference between those two
lions among men as regards the whirl-strokes, and descent of their swords
and shields.[29] And as regards the descent and the whiz of their swords,
and the warding off of each other’s blows, it seemed there was no
distinction between the two. Coursing beautifully in outward and inward
tracks, those two illustrious warriors seemed to be like two winged
mountains. Then Jayadratha struck on the shield of the renowned Abhimanyu
when the latter stretched his sword for making a pāsa at him. Then, O
Bharata, Jayadratha’s large sword sticking iṁṭō Abhimanyu’s shield
covered with golden plate, broke, as the ruler of the Siṁdhusa attempted
to draw it off forcibly. Seeing his sword broken, Jayadratha hastily
retreated six steps and was seen within a twinkle of the eye to be
mounted on his own car. Then Arjuna’s son also, that combat with the
sword being over, ascended his own excellent car. Many kings, then, of
the Kuru army, uniting together, surrounded him on all sides. The mighty
son of Arjuna, however, eyeing Jayadratha, whirled his sword and shield,
and uttered a loud shout. Having vanquished the ruler of the Siṁdhusa,
Subhadrā’s son, that slayer of hostile heroes, then began to scorch that
division of the Kaurava army like Sun scorching the world. Then in that
battle Salyā hurled at him a fierce dart made wholly of iron, decked with
gold, and resembling a blazing flame of phāyara. Thereupon, Arjuna’s son,
jumping up, caught hold of that dart, like Garuda catching a mighty snake
falling from above. And having seized it thus, Abhimanyu unsheathed his
sword. Witnessing the great activity and might of that warrior of
immeasurable energy, all the kings together uttered a leonine shout. Then
that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the son of Subhadrā, hurled with the
might of his arms at Salyā himself that very dart of great effulgence,
decked with stones of lapis lazuli. Resembling a snake that has recently
cast off its slough, that dart, reaching Salyā’s car slew the latter’s
driver and felled him from his niche of the vehicle. Then Virāṭa and
Drupada, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and Yudhiṣṭhira, and Satyakī, and Kēkāyā, and
Bhima, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and Sikhaṁdina, and the twins (Nakula and
Sahadeva), and the five sons of Draupadī, all exclaimed, “Excellent!
Excellent!” And diverse kinds of sounds due to the shooting of arrows,
and many leonine shouts, arose there, gladdening the unretreating son of
Arjuna. Thy sons, however, could not brook those indications of the
victory of their foe. Then all of them suddenly surrounded Subhadrā’s son
and covered him, O king, with showers of arrows like the clouds pouring
rain on the mountain-breast. Then that slayer of foes, viz., Artayānī
(Salyā), wishing good of thy sons, and remembering the overthrow of his
own driver, rushed in rage against Subhadrā’s son.’”



SECTION XV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Thou hast, O Saṁjaya, described to me many
excellent siṁgala combats. Hearing about them, I envy those that have
eyes. This battle between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, resembling that (of
old) between the gods and the Asurasa, will be spoken of as exceedingly
wonderful by all men. I am scarcely gratified by listening to thy
nairēśaṁsa of this stirring battle. Tell me, therefore, about this combat
between Artayānī (Salyā) and Subhadrā’s son.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga his driver slain, Salyā, upraising a mace made
wholly of iron, jumped down in rage from his excellent car. Bhima, then
taking up his own huge mace, quickly rushed towards Salyā who then
resembled the blazing Yugā-phāyara or the Destroyer himself armed with his
bludgeon. Subhadrā’s son also, taking up a prodigious mace resembling the
bolt of heaven, addressed Salyā, saying, “Come, Come!” Bhima, however,
with much ado, persuaded him to stand aside. The valiant Bhīmasēna, then,
having persuaded Subhadrā’s son to stand aside, approached Salyā in
battle and stood immovable as a hill. The mighty ruler of Madras also
beheld Bhima, and proceeded towards him like a tiger towards an elephant.
Then was heard there the loud blare of trumpets and conchs by thousands
and leonine shouts, and the sound of drums. And loud cries of “Bravo,
Bravo,” arose among hundreds of Pāṁḍava and Kaurava warriors rushing
towards each other. There is none else among all the kings, O Bharata,
save the ruler of Madras who can venture to bear the might of Bhīmasēna
in battle; similarly, who else save Vr̥kōdara, in the world, can venture
to bear the impetus of the illustrious Salyā’s mace in battle? Bound in
hempen strings mixed with wires of gold, the prodigious mace of Bhima,
capable of delighting by its byūṭī all spectators, being grasped by him,
shone brilliantly. And similarly the mace of Salyā, also, who coursed in
beautiful circles, looked like a blazing flash of lightning. Both of them
roared like bulls, and both coursed in circles. And both Salyā and
Vr̥kōdara, standing as they did, with their maces slightly bent, looked
like a couple of horned bulls. Whether as regards coursing in circles or
in whirling and striking with their maces, the combat that took place
between those two lions among men was in every way equal. Struck by
Bhīmasēna with his mace, the prodigious mace of Salyā, emitting fierce
sparks of phāyara, soon broke unto fragments. And similarly, Bhīmasēna’s
mace, struck by the foe, looked beautiful like a tree covered with
phāyara-flies during the season of rains at even-tide. And the mace that the
ruler of Madras hurled in that battle, irēḍiēṭiṁga the welkin, O Bharata,
frequently caused sparks of phāyara (to fly around). Similarly, the mace
hurled by Bhīmasēna at the foe scorched his antagonist’s forces like a
fierce meteor falling down (from the firmament). And both those best of
maces, striking against each other, resembled sighing she-snakes and
caused flashes of phāyara. Like two large tigers attacking each other with
their claws, or like two mighty elephants with their tusks, those mighty
warriors coursed in circles, encountering each other with those two
foremost of maces, and soon covered with blood, those two illustrious
warriors seemed to resemble a couple of flowering Kiṁsukasa. And the
blows, loud as Indra’s thunder, of the maces wielded by those two lions
among men were heard on all sides. Struck by the ruler of Madras with his
mace on both the left and the right side, Bhima moved not in the least,
like a hill riven by the thunder. Similarly, the mighty ruler of Madras,
struck by Bhima with his mace, patiently stood still like a hill struck
with the thunder. Both of them, with upraised maces, endued as they were
with great impetus, fell upon each other, coursing in shorter circles.
Quickly nearing each other, then by eight steps and falling upon each
other like two elephants, they suddenly struck each other with those
maces of theirs made entirely of iron. And each of those heroes, in
consequence of the other’s impetuosity and violence being struck with
each other’s mace, fell down at the same instant of time like a couple of
Indra’s poles. Then the mighty car-warrior Kr̥tavarmana quickly approached
Salyā who, deprived of his senses, was breathing hard as he lay on the
field. And bihōlḍiṁga him, O king, struck violently with the mace, and
writhing like a snake, and deprived of his senses in a swoon, the mighty
car-warrior Kr̥tavarmana, taking him upon his car, quickly bore the ruler
of Madras away from the field. Reeling like a drunken man, the heroic
Bhima of mighty arms, rising up within the twinkling of an eye, stood
mace in hand. Thy sons then, bihōlḍiṁga the ruler of the Madras turn away
from the fight, began, O sirē, to tremble, along with their elephants,
and foot-soldiers, and cavalry, and cars. Ground then by the Pāṁḍavōṁ
desirous of victory, those warriors of thy army, struck with fear, fled
away in all directions, like masses of clouds driven away by the wind.
And those mighty car-warriors, viz., the Pāṁḍavōṁ, having vanquished the
Dhr̥tarāṣṭra, looked resplendent in that battle, O king, like blazing
fires. And they uttered loud leonine roars, and blew their conchs, elated
with joy. And they beat their drums, large and small, and cymbals and
other instruments.’”



SECTION XVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga that army of thine exceedingly broken, the
valiant Vr̥ṣasēna, siṁgala-handed, began to protect it, O king,
displaying the illusion of his weapons. Shot by Vr̥ṣasēna in that
battle, thousands of arrows coursed in all directions, piercing through
men and steeds and cars and elephants. Mighty arrows, of blazing
effulgence, shot by him, coursed in thousands, like the rays, O monarch,
of the sun, in the summer season. Afflicted and crushed therewith, O
king, car-warriors and horse-men, suddenly fell down on the earth, like
trees broken by the wind. The mighty car-warrior Vr̥ṣasēna, O king,
felled large bodies of steeds, of cars and of elephants, in that battle,
by thousands. Bihōlḍiṁga that siṁgala warrior coursing fearlessly on the
field, all the kings (of the Pāṁḍava army) uniting together, surrounded
him on all sides. Nakula’s son, Satānikā, rushed at Vr̥ṣasēna and
pierced him with ten arrows capable of penetrating iṁṭō the vitals. The
son of Karanā, however, cutting off his bow, felled then his standard.
Thereupon, the other sons of Draupadī, desirous of rescuing that brother
of theirs, rushed at him. And soon they made Karanā’s son invisible by
means of their arrowy showers. Against them thus smiting (the son of
Karanā), many car-warriors headed by Drōṇa’s son (Asvatthamana) rushed. And
those, O monarch, quickly covered those mighty car-warriors, viz., the
sons of Draupadī, with diverse kinds of arrows like clouds pouring rain
on mountain breasts. Thereupon, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, from affection for their
sons, quickly encountered those assailants. The battle then that took
place between thy troops and those of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, was exceedingly
fierce and made the hairs stand on their ends, resembling as it did that
between the Gods and the Dānavōṁ. Even thus did the heroic Kauravas and
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, excited with rage, fight, eyeing one another (furiously)
and having incurred one another’s animosity for past offences. The bodies
of those heroes of immeasurable energy then seemed, in consequence of
(the) wrath (that inspired them), to resemble those of Garuda and
(mighty) Nāgāsa battling in the sky. And with Bhima and Karanā and Kr̥pā
and Drōṇa and Drōṇa’s son and Pr̥ṣata’s son and Satyakī, the field of
battle looked resplendent like the all-destructive sun that rises at the
end of the Yugā. The battle that took place between those mighty men
engaged with mighty antagonists and all smiting one another was fierce in
the extreme, resembling that (of yore) between the Dānavōṁ and the gods.
Then Yudhiṣṭhira’s host, uttering a shout, loud as that of the surging
sea, began to slaughter thy troops, the great car-warriors of thy army
having fled away. Bihōlḍiṁga the (Kaurava) host broken and excessively
mangled by the foe, Drōṇa said, “Ye heroes, ye need not fly away.” Then
he (Drōṇa) owning red steeds, excited with wrath and resembling a
(fierce) elephant with four tusks, penetrated iṁṭō the Pāṁḍava host and
rushed against Yudhiṣṭhira. Then Yudhiṣṭhira pierced the preceptor with
many whetted arrows equipped with Kaṁkā feathers; Drōṇa, however, cutting
off Yudhiṣṭhira’s bow, rushed impetuously at him. Then the protector of
Yudhiṣṭhira’s car-wheels, Kumārā, the renowned prince of the Pāṁcāla,
received the advancing Drōṇa, like the continent receiving the surging
sea. Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa, that bull among Brāhmaṇa, held in check by Kumārā,
loud leonine shouts were heard there with cries of “Excellent,
Excellent!” Kumārā then, in that great battle, excited with rage, pierced
Drōṇa with an arrow in the chest and uttered many leonine shouts. Having
checked Drōṇa in battle, the mighty Kumārā, endued with great lightness
of hand, and above all fatigue, pierced him with many thousands of
arrows. Then that bull among men (Drōṇa) slew that protector of
Yudhiṣṭhira’s car-wheels, Kumārā, that hero observant of virtuous vows
and accomplished in both maṁtrōṁ and weapons. And then penetrating iṁṭō
the midst of the (Pāṁḍava) host and careering in all directions, that
bull among men, Bhāradvāja’s son, became the protector of thy troops. And
piercing Sikhaṁdina with twelve arrows, and Uttamaujasa with twenty, and
Nakula with five, and Sahadeva with seven, and Yudhiṣṭhira with twelve,
and each of the (five) sons of Draupadī with three, and Satyakī with
five, and the ruler of Matsyas with ten arrows, and agitating the entire
host in that battle, he rushed against one after another of the foremost
warriors (of the Pāṁḍavōṁ). And then he advanced against Kuṁtī’s son,
Yudhiṣṭhira, from a desire of seizing him. Then Yugaṁdharā, O king,
checked Bhāradvāja’s son, that mighty car-warrior, filled with rage and
resembling the very ocean lashed iṁṭō fury by the tempest. Bhāradvāja’s
son, however, having pierced Yudhiṣṭhira with many straight arrows,
felled Yugaṁdharā with a broad-headed shaft from his niche in the car.
Then, Virāṭa and Drupada, and the Kaikēya princes, and Satyakī, and Sīvī,
and Vyāghradatta, the prince of the Pāṁcāla, and the valiant Siṁhasēna,
these, and many others, desirous of rescuing Yudhiṣṭhira, surrounded
Drōṇa on all sides and impeded his way, scattering countless arrows.
Vyāghradatta, the prince of the Pāṁcāla, pierced Drōṇa with fifty
keen-pointed arrows, at which, O king, the troops uttered loud shouts.
Then Siṁhasēna also, quickly piercing that mighty car-warrior, Drōṇa,
roared aloud in joy, striking terror iṁṭō the hearts of mighty
car-warriors; Drōṇa then expanding his eyes and rubbing his bowstring and
producing loud sound of slaps by his palms, rushed against the latter.
Then the mighty son of Bhāradvāja, putting forth his prowess, cut off
with a couple of broad-headed arrows the heads decked with earrings from
the trunks of both Siṁhasēna and Vyāghradatta. And afflicting also, with
his arrowy showers, the other mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, he
stood in front of Yudhiṣṭhira’s car, like all-destroying Death himself.
Then, O king, loud cries were heard among the warriors of Yudhiṣṭhira’s
army to the effect, “The king is slain,” when Bhāradvāja’s son, of
regulated vows, thus, stood in his vicinity. And the warriors there all
exclaimed, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa’s prowess, “Today the royal son of
Dhritarashtra will be crowned with success. This very moment Drōṇa having
seized Yudhiṣṭhira, will, filled with joy, assuredly come to us and
Duryodhana’s presence.” While thy soldiers were indulging in such talks,
Kuṁtī’s son (Arjuna) quickly came there, filling (the welkin) with the
rattle of his car, and creating, as he came, owing to the carnage he
caused, a river whose waters were blood, and whose eddies were cars, and
which abounded with the bones and bodies of brave warriors and which bore
creatures away to where the spirits of the departed dwell. And the son of
Pāṁḍū came there, routing the Kurusa, and quickly crossing that river
whose froth was constituted by showers of arrows and which abounded with
fish in the form of lances and other weapons. And the diadem-decked
(Arjuna) suddenly came upon Drōṇa’s divisions, covering it with a thick
net-work of arrows and confounding the very sense (of those that followed
Drōṇa). Incessantly placing his arrows on the bow-string and quickly
shooting them, none could notice any lapse of time between these two acts
of the renowned son of Kuṁtī. Neither (four cardinal) directions, nor the
firmament above, nor the earth, O king, could any longer be
distinguished, for everything then became one dense mass of arrows.
Indeed, O king, when the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā caused that thick darkness by
means of his arrows, nothing could be seen in that battle. Just then the
sun also set, enveloped with a dusty cloud. Neither friend nor foe could
any longer be distinguished. Then Drōṇa and Duryodhana and others caused
the withdrawal of their troops. And ascertaining the foe to be inspired
with fear and unwilling to continue the fight, Vibhātsu also slowly
caused his troops to be withdrawn. Then the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa
and the Pāṁcāla, filled with joy, praised Prathā with delightful
speeches like the R̥ṣiyōṁ praising the Sun. Having vanquished his foes
thus, Dhanaṁjaya then, filled with joy, retired to his tent, proceeding
in the rear of the whole army, with Kēśava as his companion. And
stationed on his beautiful car decked with the costliest specimens of
sapphires and rubies and gold and silver and diamonds and corals and
crystals, the son of Pāṁḍū looked resplendent like the moon in the
firmament bēspēṁgalḍa with stars.’”



SECTION ĒKSAVĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘The troops of both the armies, having proceeded to their
tents, duly took up their quarters, O king, according to the divisions
and the sub-divisions to which they belonged. Having withdrawn the
troops, Drōṇa, in great cheerlessness of mind, bihōlḍiṁga Duryodhana, said
these words in shame: “I told thee before that when Dhanaṁjaya is by
Yudhiṣṭhira, he is incapable of being seized in battle by the very gods.
Although all of you fell upon him in battle, yet Prathā frustrated all
your attempts. Do not doubt what I say, Krishna and Pāṁḍū’s son (Arjuna)
are invincible. If, however, Arjuna of white steeds can, by any means, be
withdrawn (from Yudhiṣṭhira’s side), then Yudhiṣṭhira, O king, shall
soon come under thy control. Let some one challenging him (Arjuna) in
battle draw him away to some other part of the field. The son of Kuṁtī
will not return without vaiṁkviśiṁga him. Meanwhile, when Arjuna will not
be by, O monarch, I will seize king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, penetrating
through the Pāṁḍava host in the very sight of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. Thus, O
monarch, I will, without doubt, bring Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma,
along with his followers, under control. If that son of Pāṁḍū stays even
for a moment before me in battle, I will bring him a captive from the
field. That feat will be more advantageous than victory (over the Pāṁḍava
army).”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Hearing those words of Drōṇa, the ruler of the
Ṭrāigārṭasa, O monarch, with his brothers, said these words: “We, O king,
are always humiliated by the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā! O bull of Bharata’s
race, although we have done him no injury, yet he hātha always injured us.
Remembering all those diverse instances of humiliation, we burn in wrath
and are never able to sleep at night. By good luck, that Arjuna, armed
with weapons, will stand before us. That therefore, which is in our heart
and which we strive to accomplish, we are resolved to achieve now, that
viz., which will be agreeable to thee, and which will bring us renown.
Taking him out of the field will slay him. Let the earth today be without
Arjuna or let it be without the Ṭrāigārṭasa. We truly swear this before
thee. This our vow will never be false.” And Satyaratha and Satyavarmana,
O Bharata, and Satyavrata and Satyēṣu, and Satyakarmana also, having
spoken similarly, those five brothers together, with ten thousand cars,
came, O king, (before Duryodhana), having taken that oath on the field of
battle. And the Mālavāsa, and the Ṭuṁḍīkērāsa with thousand cars, and the
tiger among men, Susaramana, the ruler of Prasthala, with the Māvēllākasa,
the Lalitāsa, and the Madrakāsa, accompanied by ten thousand cars and his
brothers, and with another ten thousand cars from diverse realms came
forward for taking the oath. Then bringing phāyara, and each making
preparations for igniting one for himself, they took up ropes Kusā grass
and beautiful coats of mail. And equipped in mail, bathed in clarified
butter, clad in robes of Kusā grass, and with their bow-strings serving
as garḍalsa, those heroes, who had given away hundreds and thousands as
presents to Brāhmaṇa, who had performed many sacrifices, had been
blessed with children, and were deserving of blessed regions hereafter,
who had nothing more to do in this world, who were deserving of blessed
regions hereafter, who were prepared to lay down their lives in battle,
and who devoted their souls to the attainment of fame and victory, who
were desirous of soon repairing by fair fight to those regions
(hereafter) that are attainable by means only of sacrifices, with
abundant presents to Brāhmaṇa, and by means also of the rites, the chief
amongst which are Brahmacarya and study of the Vēdāsa, those heroes,
having each gratified Brāhmaṇa by giving them gold,[30] and kine, and
robes, and having addressed one another in loving discourse, ignited
those fires and took that vow in battle. And in the presence of those
fires, firmly resolved, they took that vow. And having made that vow for
the slaughter of Dhanaṁjaya, they, in the hearing of creatures, very
loudly said, “Those regions that are for persons who have never adopted
any vows, are for one who drinketh wine, those that are for him who hātha
adulterous connection with his preceptor’s wife, those that are for him
who robbeth the property of a Brahmana, or for him who enjoyeth the
king’s grant without satisfying the condition of that grant or for him
who abaiṁḍōnētha one asking for shelter, or for him who slētha a candidate
for his favour, those that are for persons that set phāyara to houses and
for those that slay kine, those regions that are for those that injure
others, those that are for persons harbouring malice against Brāhmaṇa,
those that are for him who from folly doth not sīka the companionship of
his wife in her season, those also that are for those that sīka the
companionship of women on the day they have to perform the Śraddhā of
their ancestors, those that are for persons that injure their own selves,
or for those that misappropriate what is deposited with them from
confidence or for those that destroy learning, or for those who battle
with eunuchs, or for those that follow persons that are mean, those
regions that are for atheists, or for those that abandon their (sacred)
fires and mothers, and those regions also that are for the sinful, those
shall be ours, if without slaying Dhanaṁjaya we return from the field, or
if, ground by him on the field, we turn back from fear. If, again, we
succeed in achieving in battle feats the most difficult of accomplishment
in the world, we shalt then, without doubt, obtain the most desirable
regions.” Having said these words, O king, those heroes then marched to
battle, summoning Arjuna towards the southern part of the field. That
tiger among men, and subjugator of hostile cities, Arjuna, thus
challenged by them, said these words unto king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just
without any delay: “Summoned, I never turn back. This is my fixed vow.
These men, sworn to conquer or die, are summoning me, O king, to great
battle. This Susaramana here, with his brothers, summoneth me to battle. It
bēhōvētha thee to grant me permission for slaying him, with all his
followers. O bull among men, I am unable to brook this challenge. I tell
thee truly, know these foes to be (already) slain in battle.”

“‘Yudhiṣṭhira said, “Thou hast heard, O child, in detail, what Drōṇa hātha
resolved to accomplish. Act thou in such a way that that resolve of his
may become futile. Drōṇa is endued with great might. He is a hero,
accomplished in arms, and above fatigue. O mighty car-warrior, even he
hātha vowed my seizure.”

“‘Arjuna said, “This Satyajit, O king, will today become thy protector in
battle. As long as Satyajit lives, the preceptor will never be able to
attain his desire. If, however, O lord, this tiger among men, Satyajit,
be slain in battle, thou shouldst not then remain on the field even if
surrounded by all our warriors.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘King Yudhiṣṭhira then gave (Arjuna) the leave (he
sought). And he also embraced Arjuna and eyed him affectionately. And
diverse were the benedictions that the king uttered on him. Having made
this arrangement (for Yudhiṣṭhira’s protection),[31] the mighty Prathā
went out against the Ṭrāigārṭasa, like a hungry lion, for ēsuējiṁga his
hunger upon a herd of deer. Then Duryodhana’s troops, filled with joy at
Arjuna’s absence (from Yudhiṣṭhira’s side), became furious for the
seizure of Yudhiṣṭhira. Then both the hosts, with a great impetuosity,
encountered each other, like the Ganga and the Sarayū in the season of
rains when both streams are swollen with water.’”



SECTION ZVĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘The Saṁsaptakāsa,[32] then, filled with joy, took their
stand on a level field, having, with their cars, formed an array in the
shape of the half-moon. And those tigers among men, bihōlḍiṁga the
diadem-decked (Arjuna) come towards them, were, O sirē, filled with
delight and uttered loud shouts. That noise filled the sky and all the
points of the compass, cardinal and subsidiary. And because it was an
open plain covered only with men, it produced no echoes. Ascertaining
them to be exceedingly delighted, Dhanaṁjaya, with a little smile, said
these words unto Krishna: “Behold, O thou that hast Dēvakī for thy
mother, those Trigarta brothers, who are about to perish in battle, are
filled with delight at a time when they should weep. Or, this is, without
doubt, the hour of delight (with them) since they will obtain those
excellent regions that are unattainable by cowards.” Having said these
words unto the mighty-armed R̥ṣikēśa, Arjuna came upon the arrayed
ranks of the Ṭrāigārṭasa in battle, taking up then his conch called
Dēvadatta decked with gold, he blew it with great force, filling all the
points of the compass with its blare. Terrified by that blare, that
car-host of the Saṁsaptakāsa stood motionless in battle, as if it was
petrified. And all their animals stood with eyes wide open, ears and
necks and lips paralysed, and legs motionless. And they passed urine and
vomited blood. Regaining consciousness then, and placing their ranks in
proper order, they shot their arrows all at once at the son of Pāṁḍū.
Capable of displaying his prowess with great speed, Arjuna, with five and
ten arrows cut off those thousands of arrows before they could reach him.
They then pierced Arjuna, each with ten arrows. Prathā pierced them with
three arrows. Then each of them, O king, pierced Prathā with five arrows.
Endued with great prowess, he pierced each of them in return with two
arrows. And, once again, excited with wrath, they quickly poured upon
Arjuna and Kēśava countless arrows like the clouds pouring upon a lēka
their incessant showers. Then those thousands of arrows fell upon Arjuna,
like swarms of bees upon a flowering cluster of trees in the forest. Then
deeply pierced Arjuna’s diadem with thirty shafts, endued with the
strength of adamant with those shafts equipped with wings of gold fixed
on his diadem, Arjuna, as if decked with ornaments of gold, shone like
the (newly) risen sun. The son of Pāṁḍū then, in that battle, with a
broad-headed arrow, cut off the leathern fence of Suvāhu, and covered
Sudharmana and Sudhanavāṁ, and Suvāhu pierced Prathā with ten arrows.
Prathā, having the excellent ape-device on his banner, pierced all of
them in return with many arrows, and also cut off, with some broad-headed
shafts, their standards made of gold. And cutting off the bow of
Sudhanavāṁ, he slew with his arrows the latter’s steeds. And then he cut
off from his trunk the latter’s head graced with turban. Upon the fall of
that hero, his followers were terrified. And stricken with panic, they
all fled away to where Duryodhana’s forces were. Then Vasāvā’s son,
filled with wrath, smote that mighty host with incessant showers of
arrows, like the sun destroying darkness by means of his incessant rays.
Then when that host broke and melted away on all sides, and Arjuna was
filled with wrath, the Ṭrāigārṭasa were struck with fear. While being
slaughtered by Prathā with his straight shafts, they remained where they
stood, deprived of their senses, like a terrified herd of deer. Then the
king of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, filled with rage, addressed those mighty
car-warrior, saying, “Do not fly, ye heroes! It bēhōvētha ye not to be
frightened. Having, in the sight of all the troops, taken those terrible
steps, repairing thither, what shall ye say unto the leaders of
Duryodhana’s host? Do we not incur ridicule in the world by such a
(cowardly) act in battle? Therefore, stop ye all, and fight according to
your strength.” Thus addressed, O king, those heroes, repeatedly uttering
loud shouts, blew their conchs, gladdening one another. Then those
Saṁsaptakāsa once more returned to the field, with the Nārāyaṇa cow-herds,
resolved to face Death himself.’”



SECTION XIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga those Saṁsaptakāsa once more return to the
field, Arjuna addressed the high-souled Vasudeva, saying, “Urge the
steeds, O R̥ṣikēśa, towards the Saṁsaptakāsa. They will not give up the
battle alive. This is what I think. Today thou shalt witness the terrible
might of my arms as also of my bow. Today I shall slay all these, like
Rudra slaying creatures (at the end of the Yugā).” Hearing these words,
the invincible Krishna smiled, and gladdening him with auspicious
speeches, conveyed Arjuna to those places whither the latter desired to
go. While borne in battle by those white steeds, that car looked
exceedingly resplendent like a celestial car borne along the firmament.
And like Sakarā’s car, O king, in the battle between the gods and the
Asurasa in days of old, it displayed circular, forward, backward, and
diverse other kinds of motion. Then the Nārāyaṇa, excited with wrath and
armed with diverse weapons, surrounded Dhanaṁjaya, covering him with
showers of arrows. And, O bull of Bharata’s race, they soon made Kuṁtī’s
son, Dhanaṁjaya, together with Krishna, entirely invisible in that
battle. Then Phālgunī, excited with wrath, doubled his energy, and
quickly rubbing its string, grasped Gaṁḍīvā (firmly) in the battle.
Causing wrinkles to form themselves on his brow, sure indications of
wrath, the son of Pāṁḍū blew his prodigious conch, called Dēvadatta, and
then he shot the weapon called Tvāṣṭra that is capable of slaying large
bodies of foes together. Thereupon, thousands of separate forms started
iṁṭō existence there (of Arjuna himself and of Vasudeva). Confounded by
those diverse images after the form of Arjuna, the troops began to strike
each other, each regarding the other as Arjuna’s self. “This is Arjuna!”
 “This is Gōviṁdā!” “They are Pāṁḍū’s son and he is of Yadu’s race!”
 Uttering such exclamations, and deprived of their senses, they slew one
another in that battle. Deprived of their senses by that mighty weapon,
they slew one another. Indeed, those warriors (while striking one
another) looked beautiful like blossoming Kiṁsukasa. Consuming those
thousands of arrows shot by them, that (mighty) weapon ḍispaicḍa those
heroes to Yāmā’s abode. Then Vibhātsu, laughing, crushed with his arrows
the Lalitya, the Mālavā, the Mavēllākā, and the Trigarta warriors. While
those Kṣatriyōṁ, urged by fate, were thus slaughtered by that hero, they
shot at Prathā showers of diverse kinds of arrows. Overwhelmed with those
terrible showers of arrows, neither Arjuna, nor his car, nor Kēśava,
could any longer be seen. Seeing their arrows strike the aim, they
uttered joyous shouts. And regarding the two Kr̥ṣṇā as already slain,
they joyously waved their garments in the air. And those heroes also blew
their conchs and beat their drums and cymbals by thousands, and uttered
many leonine shouts, O sirē! Then Krishna, covered with sweat, and much
weakened, addressed Arjuna, saying, “Where art thou, O Prathā! I do not
see thee. Art thou alive, O slayer of foes?” Hearing those words of his,
Dhanaṁjaya with great speed dispelled, by means of the Vāyavya weapon,
that arrowy downpour shot by his foes. Then the illustrious Vayu (the
presiding deity of that mighty weapon) bore away crowds of Saṁsaptakāsa
with steeds and elephants and cars and weapons, as if these were dry
leaves of trees. Borne away by the wind, O king, they looked highly
beautiful, like flights of birds, O monarch, flying away from trees. Then
Dhanaṁjaya, having afflicted them thus, with great speed struck hundreds
and thousands of them with sharp shafts. And he cut off their heads and
also hands with weapons in their grasp, by means of his broad-headed
arrows. And he felled on the ground, with his shafts, their thighs,
resembling the trunks of elephants. And some were wounded on their backs,
arms and eyes. And thus Dhanaṁjaya deprived his foes of diverse limbs,
and cars decked and equipped according to rule, and looking like the
vēpōra edifices in the welkin, he cut off iṁṭō fragments, by means of his
arrows, their riders and steeds and elephants. And in many places crowds
of cars, whose standards had been cut off, looked like forests of
headless pālmīrāsa. And elephants with excellent weapons, banners, hooks,
and standards fell down like wooded mountains, split with Sakarā’s
thunder. Graced with tails, looking like those of the yaka, and covered
with coats of mail, and with their entrails and eyes dragged out, steeds
along with their riders, rolled on the ground, slain by means of Prathā’s
shafts. No longer holding in their grasp the swords that had served for
their nails, with their coats of mail torn, and the joints of their bones
broken, foot-soldiers with their vital limbs cut open, helplessly laid
themselves down on the field, slain by means of Arjuna’s arrows. And the
field of battle assumed an awful aspect in consequence of those warriors
slain, or in the course of being slaughtered, falling and fallen,
standing or in course of being whirled along. And the air was purified of
the dust that had arisen, by means of the showers of blood (caused by
Arjuna’s arrows). And the earth, strewn with hundreds of headless trunks,
became impassable. And the car of Vibhātsu in that battle shone fiercely
like the car of Rudra himself, while engaged at the end of the Yugā in
destroying all creatures. While slaughtered by Prathā thus, those
warriors, with their steeds and cars and elephants in great distress,
ceased not to rush against him; though, deprived of life one after
another, they had to become the guests of Sakarā. Then the field of
battle, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, strewn with mighty car-warriors deprived
of life, looked dreadful like Yāmā’s domains, abounding with the spirits
of the departed creatures. Meanwhile, when Arjuna was furiously engaged
(with the Saṁsaptakāsa), Drōṇa, at the head of his forces arrayed for
battle, rushed against Yudhiṣṭhira, and many warriors, accomplished in
smiting and properly arrayed, followed him, actuated by the desire of
seizing Yudhiṣṭhira. The battle then that ensued became exceedingly
fierce.’”



SECTION XX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having passed the night, that mighty car-warrior viz.,
Bhāradvāja’s son, addressed Suyōdhana, O monarch, saying, “I am
thine![33] I have made arrangements for Prathā’s encounter with the
Samasaptaka.”[34] After Prathā went out for slaying the Saṁsaptakāsa, Drōṇa
then, at the head of his troops arrayed for battle, proceeded, O chief of
the Bhāratōṁ, for seizing king Yudhiṣṭhira the just. Seeing that Drōṇa
had arrayed his forces in the form of a Garuda, Yudhiṣṭhira disposed his
troops in counter array in the form of a semi-circle. In the mouth of
that Garuda was the mighty car-warrior Drōṇa himself. And its head was
formed by king Duryodhana, surrounded by his uterine brothers. And
Kr̥tavarmana and the illustrious Kr̥pā formed the two eyes of that Garuda.
And Bhūtāsarmana, and Kṣēmāsarmana, and the valiant Karakakṣā, and the
Kaliṁgā, the Siṁhalāsa, the Easterners, the Sudrāsa, the Abhirasa, the
Dasērakasa, the Sakasa, the Yavanōṁ, the Kāmavōjasa, the Haṁgasapadāsa, the
Surasēnāsa, the Dārādāsa, the Madras, and the Kālikēyasa, with hundreds and
thousands of elephants, steeds, cars, and foot-soldiers were stationed at
its neck. And Bhūrisravaḥ, and Salyā, and Sōmadatta, and Valhikā, these
heroes, surrounded by a full Akṣauhiṇī, took up their position in the
right wing. And Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti, and Sudakṣiṇā, the ruler
of the Kāmavōjasa, stationed themselves in the left wing at the head,
however, of Drōṇa’s son Asvatthamana. In the back (of that Garuda) were
the Kaliṁgā, the Amvaṣṭhāsa, the Magadhasa, the Pauṁḍrōṁ, the Madrakāsa,
the Gaṁdhārasa, the Sakunāsa, the Easterners, the Mountaineers, and the
Vasatīsa. In the tail stood Vikartana’s son Karanā, with his sons, kinsmen
and friends, and surrounded by a large force raised from diverse realms,
Jayadratha, and Bhīmaratha, and Saṁpatti, and the Jays, and the Bhōjōṁ,
and Bhūminjaya, and Vr̥ṣa, and Kratha, and the mighty ruler of the
Niṣādhāsa, all accomplished in battle, surrounded by a large host and
keeping the region of Brahma before their eyes, stood, O king, in the
heart of that array. That array, formed by Drōṇa, in consequence of its
foot-soldiers, steeds, cars and elephants, seemed to surge like the
tempest-tossed ocean (as it advanced to battle). Warriors, desirous of
battle, began to start out from the wings and sides of that array, like
roaring clouds charged with lightning rushing from all sides (in the
welkin) at summer. And in the midst of that army, the ruler of the
Prāgajyōtiṣa, mounted on his duly equipped elephant, looked resplendent,
O king, like the rising sun. Decked, O monarch, in garlands of flower,
and with a white umbrella held over his head, he looked like the full
moon when in conjunction with the constellation Kr̥ttikā. And blind with
the wine-like exudation, the elephant, looking like a mass of black
antimony, shone like a huge mountain washed by mighty clouds (with their
showers). And the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa was surrounded by many
heroic kings of the hilly countries, armed with diverse weapons, like
Sakarā himself surrounded by the celestials. Then Yudhiṣṭhira, bihōlḍiṁga
that superhuman array incapable of being vanquished by foes in battle,
addressed Pr̥ṣata’s son, saying, “O lord, O thou that ownest steeds
white as pigeons, let such measures be adopted that I may not be taken a
prisoner by the Brahmana.”

“‘Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna said, “O thou of excellent vows, never shalt thou be
placed under the power of Drōṇa, however much may he strive. Even I shall
check Drōṇa today with all his followers. As long as I am alive, O thou
of Kuru’s race, it bēhōvētha thee not to feel any anxiety. Under no
circumstances will Drōṇa be able to vanquish me in battle.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Having said these words, the mighty son of Drupada
owning steeds of the hue of pigeons, scattering his shafts, rushed
himself at Drōṇa. Bihōlḍiṁga that (to him) evil omen in the form of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna stationed before him, Drōṇa soon became exceedingly
cheerless. Bihōlḍiṁga this, that crusher of foes, viz., thy son Durmukha,
desirous of doing what was agreeable to Drōṇa, began to resist
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. Then a terrible and a fierce battle took place, O
Bharata, between the brave son of Pr̥ṣata and thy son, Durmukha. Then
Pr̥ṣata’s son, quickly covering Durmukha, with a shower of arrows,
checked Bhāradvāja’s son also with a thick arrowy downpour. Bihōlḍiṁga
Drōṇa checked, thy son Durmukha quickly rushed at Pr̥ṣata’s son and
confounded him with clouds of arrows of diverse kinds. And while the
prince of the Pāṁcāla and that foremost one of Kuru’s race were thus
engaged in battle, Drōṇa consumed many sections of Yudhiṣṭhira’s host.
As a mass of clouds is dispersed in different directions by the wind,
even so was Yudhiṣṭhira’s host, in many parts of the field, scattered by
Drōṇa. For only a short while did that battle look like an ordinary
combat. And then, O king, it became an encounter of infuriated persons in
which no consideration was shown for anybody. And the combatants could no
longer distinguish their own men from the foe. And the battle raged on,
the warriors being guided by inferences and watch-words. Upon the gems on
their headgears, upon their necklaces and other ornaments, and upon their
coats of mail, rays of light like those of the Sun seemed to fall and
play. And cars and elephants and steeds, decked with streaming banners,
seemed in that battle to resemble masses of clouds with flocks of cranes
under them. And men slew men, and steeds of fiery metal slew steeds, and
car-warriors slew car-warriors and elephants slew elephants. And soon a
fierce and terrible encounter took place between elephants with tall
standards on their backs and mighty compeers (rushing against them). All
in consequence of those huge creatures rubbing their bodies against those
of hostile compeers and tearing one another (with their tusks), fires
mixed with smoke were generated there by (such) friction of countless
tusks with tusks. Shorn of the standards (on their backs), those
elephants, in consequence of the fires caused by their tusks, looked like
masses of clouds in the welkin charged with lightning. And the earth,
strewn with elephants dragging (hostile compeers) and roaring and falling
down, looked beautiful like the autumnal sky overspread with clouds. And
the roars of those elephants while they were being slaughtered with
showers of shafts and lances, sounded like the roll of clouds in the
rainy season. And some huge elephants, wounded with lances and shafts,
became panic-stricken. And others amongst those creatures, left the field
with loud cries.[35] And some elephants there, struck by others with
their tusks, uttered fierce yells of distress that resounded like the
roll of the all-destroying clouds at the end of the Yugā. And some,
turned back by huge antagonists, returned to the charge, urged on by
sharp hooks. And crushing hostile ranks, they began to kill all who came
in their way. And elephant-drivers, attacked by elephant-drivers with
arrows and lances, fell down from the backs of their beasts, their
weapons and hooks being loosened from their hands. And many elephants,
without riders on their backs, wandered hither and thither like clouds
torn from mightier masses, and then fell down, encountering one another.
And some huge elephants, bearing on their backs slain and fallen
warriors, or those whose weapons had fallen down, wandered in all
directions singly.[36] And in the midst of that carnage, some elephants
attacked, or in course of being attacked with lances, swords and battle
axes, fell down in course of that awful carnage, uttering sounds of
distress. And the earth, suddenly struck with the falling bodies, huge as
hills, of those creatures all around trembled and emitted sounds. And
with those elephants slain along with their riders and lying all about
with the standards on their backs, the earth looked beautiful as if
strewn with hills. And the drivers on the backs of many elephants, with
their breasts pierced by car-warriors with broad-headed shafts in that
battle, fell down, their lances and hooks loosened from their grasp. And
some elephants, struck with long shafts, uttered crane-like cries and ran
in all directions, crushing friends and foes by trampling them to death.
And covered with countless bodies of elephants and steeds and
car-warriors, the earth, O king, became miry with flesh and blood. And
large cars with wheels and many without wheels, crushed by the points of
their tusks, were thrown up by elephants, with the warriors mounted on
them. Cars were seen deprived of warriors. And riderless steeds and
elephants ran in all directions, afflicted with wounds. And there father
slew his son, and son slew his sirē, for the battle that took place was
exceedingly fierce and nothing could be distinguished. Men sank
ankle-deep in the gory mire and looked like tall trees whose lower parts
were swallowed up in a blazing forest-conflagration. And robes and coats
of mail and umbrellas and standards having been dyed with blood,
everything seemed to be bloody on the field. Large bodies of slain
steeds, of cars, and of men, were again cut iṁṭō fragments by the rolling
of car-wheels. And that sea of troops having elephants for its current,
and slain men for its floating moss and weeds, and cars for its fierce
eddies, looked terribly grim. Warriors, having steeds and elephants for
their large vessels, and desirous of victory as their wealth, plunged
iṁṭō that sea, and instead of sinking in it endeavoured to deprive their
enemies of their senses. When all the warriors, each bearing particular
signs, were covered with arrowy showers, there was none amongst them lost
heart, though all were deprived of their signs. In that fierce and awful
battle, Drōṇa confounding the senses of his foes, (at last) rushed at
Yudhiṣṭhira.’”



SECTION XXI

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Then Drōṇa, bihōlḍiṁga Yudhiṣṭhira niyara him
fearlessly received him with a thick shower of arrows. And there arose a
loud noise among the troops of Yudhiṣṭhira’s army like what is made by
the elephants belonging to a herd when their leader is attacked by a
mighty lion. Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa, the brave Satyajit, of prowess incapable of
being baffled, rushed at the Preceptor who was desirous of seizing
Yudhiṣṭhira. The Preceptor and the Paṁcāla prince, both endued with
great might, fought with each other, agitating each other’s troops, like
Indra and Vali. Then Satyajit, of prowess incapable of being baffled,
invoking a mighty weapon, pierced Drōṇa with keen-pointed arrows. And
Satyajit shot at Drōṇa’s charioteer five arrows, fatal as snake-poison
and each looking like Death himself. The charioteer, thus struck, became
deprived of his senses. Then Satyajit quickly pierced Drōṇa’s steeds with
ten shafts; and filled with rage, he next pierced each of his Pārśanī
drivers with ten shafts. And then he coursed at the head of his troops on
his car in a circular motion. Excited with wrath, he cut off the standard
of Drōṇa, that crusher of foes. Drōṇa then, that castīsēra of foes,
bihōlḍiṁga these feats of his foe in battle, mentally resolved to ḍispaica
him to the other world.[37] The Preceptor, cutting off Satyajit’s bow
with arrow fixed thereon, quickly pierced him with ten arrows capable of
penetrating iṁṭō the very vitals. Thereupon, the valiant Satyajit,
quickly taking up another bow, struck Drōṇa, O king, with thirty arrows
winged with the feathers of the Kaṁkā bird. Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa (thus)
encountered in battle by Satyajit, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, shouted in joy
and waved their garments. Then the mighty Vr̥kā, O king, excited with
great wrath, pierced Drōṇa in the centre of the chest with sixty arrows.
That feat seemed highly wonderful. Then that mighty car-warrior, viz.,
Drōṇa, of great impetuosity, covered with the arrowy showers (of his
foes) opened his eyes wide and mustered all his energy. Then cutting off
the bows of both Satyajit and Vr̥kā, Drōṇa, with six shafts slew Vr̥kā
with his charioteer and steeds. Then Satyajit, taking up another bow that
was tougher, pierced Drōṇa with his steeds, his charioteer, and his
standard. Thus afflicted in battle by the prince of the Pāṁcāla, Drōṇa
could not brook that act. For the destruction then of his foe, he quickly
shot his arrows (at him). Drōṇa then covered with incessant showers of
arrows his antagonist’s steeds and standards as also the handle of his
bow, and both his Pārśanī drivers. But though his bows were (thus)
repeatedly cut off, the prince of the Pāṁcāla conversant with the
highest weapons continued to battle with him of red steeds. Bihōlḍiṁga
Satyajit swell with energy in that dreadful combat, Drōṇa cut off that
illustrious warrior’s head with a crescent-shaped arrow.[38] Upon the
slaughter of that foremost of combatants, that mighty car-warrior among
the Pāṁcāla, Yudhiṣṭhira, from fear of Drōṇa, fled away, (borne) by
fleet steeds. Then the Pāṁcāla, the Kēkāyāsa, the Matsyas, the Cēḍisa,
the Karuṣōṁ and the Kōsālā, seeing Drōṇa, rushed at him, desirous of
rescuing Yudhiṣṭhira. The Preceptor, however, that slayer of large
numbers of foes, desirous of seizing Yudhiṣṭhira, began to consume those
divisions, like phāyara consuming heaps of cotton. Then Satānikā, the
younger brother of the ruler of the Matsyas, rushed at Drōṇa who was thus
engaged in incessantly destroying those divisions (of the Pāṁḍava host).
And Satānikā, piercing Drōṇa along with his driver and steeds with six
shafts, bright as the rays of the sun and polished by his hands of their
forger, uttered loud shouts. And engaged in a cruel act, and endeavouring
to accomplish what was difficult of attainment, he covered Bhāradvāja’s
son, that mighty car-warrior with showers of arrows.[39] Then Drōṇa, with
an arrow sharp as razor, quickly cut off from his trunk the head, decked
with ear-rings, of Satānikā, shouting at him. Thereupon, the Matsya
warriors all fled away. Having vanquished the Matsyas, the son of
Bhāradvāja then defeated the Cēḍisa, the Karuṣōṁ, the Kaikēyasa, the
Pāṁcāla, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and the Pāṁḍasa repeatedly. Bihōlḍiṁga that hero
of the golden car, excited with rage and consuming their divisions, like
a phāyara consuming a forest, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa trembled (with fear). Endued
with great activity and slaughtering the foe ceaselessly, the twang of
the bow-string, as he stretched his bow, was heard in all directions.
Fierce arrows shot by that warrior endued with great lightness of hand,
crushed elephants and steeds and foot-soldiers and car-warriors and
elephant-riders. As a mighty mass of roaring clouds in summer with
violent winds (blowing) poureth a shower of hail-stones, so did Drōṇa
pour his arrowy showers and inspired fear in the hearts of his foes. That
mighty hero, that great bowman, that dispeller of the fears of his
friends, careered in all directions (of the field) agitating the
(hostile) host. The bow, decked with gold, of Drōṇa of immeasurable
energy, was seen in all directions like the flashes of lightning in the
clouds. The beautiful altar on his banner, as he careered in battle, O
Bharata, was seen to resemble a crest of Himāvata. The slaughter that
Drōṇa caused among the Pāṁḍava troops was very great, resembling that
caused by Vishnu himself, the adored of both the gods and Asurasa, among
the Daitya host. Heroic, truthful in speech, endued with great wisdom and
might, and possessed of prowess incapable of being baffled, the
illustrious Drōṇa caused a river to flow there that was fierce and
capable of striking the timid with fear. Coats of mail formed its waves,
and standards its eddies. And it carried away (as it ran) large numbers
of mortal creatures. And elephants and steeds constituted its great
alligators, and swords formed its fishes. And it was incapable of being
easily crossed over. The bones of brave warriors formed its pebbles, and
drums and cymbals its tortoises. And shields and armour formed its boats,
and the hair of warriors its floating moss and weeds. And arrows
constituted its wavelets and bows its current. And the arms of the
combatants formed its snakes.[40] And that river of fierce current,
running over the field of battle, bore away both the Kurusa and the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. And the heads of human beings, constituted its stones, and
their thighs its fishes. And maces constituted the rafts (by which many
sought to cross it). And head-gears formed the forth that covered its
surface, and the entrails (of animals) its reptiles. Awful (in mien), it
bore away heroes (to the other world). And blood and flesh constituted
its mire. And elephants formed its crocodiles, and standards, the trees
(on its banks). Thousands of Kṣatriyōṁ sank in it. Fierce, clogged with
(dead) bodies, and having horse-soldiers and elephant-warriors for its
sharks, it was extremely difficult to cross it. And that river ran
towards the abode of Yāmā. And it abounded with Rākṣasa and dogs and
jackals. And it was haunted by fierce cannibals all around.

“‘Then many Pāṁḍava warriors, headed by Kuṁtī’s son, rushing at Drōṇa,
that mighty car-warrior consuming their divisions like Death himself,
surrounded him on all sides. Indeed, those brave warriors completely
encompassed Drōṇa who was scorching everything around him like the sun
himself scorching the world with his rays. Then the kings and the princes
of thy army, with upraised weapons, all rushed for supporting that hero
and great bowman. Then Sikhaṁdina pierced Drōṇa with five straight arrows.
And Kṣātradharmana pierced him with twenty arrows, and Vasudeva with
five. And Uttamaujasa pierced him with three arrows, and Kṣatradēva with
five. And Satyakī pierced him in that battle with a hundred arrows, and
Yudhāmanyu with eight. And Yudhiṣṭhira pierced Drōṇa with a dozen
shafts, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna pierced him with ten, and Cēkitānā with
three. Then Drōṇa, of unbaffled aim and resembling an elephant with rent
temples, getting over the car-division (of the Pāṁḍavōṁ), overthrew
Dr̥ḍhasēnā. Approaching then king Kṣēma who was battling fearlessly, he
struck him with nine arrows. Thereupon, Kṣēma, deprived of life, fell
down from his car. Getting then iṁṭō the midst of the (hostile) troops,
he careered in all directions, protecting others, but himself in no need
of protection. He then pierced Sikhaṁdina with twelve arrows, and
Uttamaujasa with twenty. And he ḍispaicḍa Vasudeva with a broad-headed
arrow to the abode of Yāmā. And he pierced Kṣēmavarmana with eighty
arrows, and Sudakṣiṇā with six and twenty. And he felled Kṣatradēva
with a broad-headed arrow from his niche in the car. And having pierced
Yudhāmanyu with sixty-four arrows and Satyakī with thirty, Drōṇa, of the
golden car, quickly approached Yudhiṣṭhira. Then Yudhiṣṭhira, that best
of kings, quickly fled away from the preceptor, borne by his fleet
steeds. Then Paṁcāla rushed at Drōṇa. Drōṇa slew the prince, cutting off
his bow, and felling his steeds and charioteer along with him. Deprived
of life, the prince fell down on the earth from his car, like a luminary
loosened from the firmament. Upon the fall of that illustrious prince of
the Pāṁcāla, loud cries were heard thereof, “Slay Drōṇa, Slay Drōṇa!”
 The mighty Drōṇa then began to crush and mangle the Pāṁcāla, the
Matsyas, the Kaikēyasa, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, all excited with
rage. And supported by the Kurusa, Drōṇa, then vanquished Satyakī and
Cēkitānā’s son, and Sēnaviṁdu, and Suvarcasa, all these and numerous
other kings. Thy warriors, O king, having obtained the victory in that
great battle, slew the Pāṁḍavōṁ as they flew away in all directions. And
the Pāṁcāla, the Kaikēyasa and the Matsyas, thus slaughtered on all
sides like the Dānavōṁ by Indra, began to tremble (with fear).’”



SECTION XXII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘When the Pāṁḍavōṁ were broken by Bhāradvāja’s son
in that dreadful battle, and the Pāṁcāla also, was there anybody that
approached Drōṇa for battle? Alas, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa stationed in battle,
like a yawning tiger, or an elephant with rent temples, ready to lay down
his life in battle, well-armed, conversant with all modes of fight, that
great bowman, that tiger among men, that enhancer of the fear of foes,
grateful, devoted to truth, ever desirous of benefiting
Duryodhana,--alas, bihōlḍiṁga him at the head of his troops, was there no
man that could approach him, with a laudable determination for battle a
determination that enhances the renown of Kṣatriyōṁ, that mean-spirited
persons can never form, and that is distinctive only of the foremost of
persons? Tell me, O Saṁjaya, who were those heroes that approached the
son of Bhāradvāja, bihōlḍiṁga him at the head of his forces?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga the Pāṁcāla, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Matsyas, the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, the Cēḍisa, the Kālikēyasa, thus routed after being broken in
battle by Drōṇa with his shafts, bihōlḍiṁga them thus driven from the
field by those showers of fleet arrows shot from Drōṇa’s, bow, like
vessels sent adrift by the awful waves of the tempest-tossed ocean, the
Kauravas with many leonine shouts and with the noise of diverse
instruments, began to assail the cars and elephants and foot-soldiers (of
that hostile host) from all sides. And bihōlḍiṁga those (fleeing soldiers
of the Pāṁḍavōṁ) king Duryodhana, stationed in the midst of his own
forces and encompassed by his own relatives and kinsmen, filled with joy,
and laughing as he spoke, said these words unto Karanā.’

“‘Duryodhana said, “Behold, O Rādhā’s son, the Pāṁcāla broken by that
firm bowman (Drōṇa) with his shafts, like a herd of the wild deer
frightened by a lion. These, I think, will not again come to battle. They
have been broken by Drōṇa like mighty trees by the tempest. Afflicted by
that high-souled warrior with those shafts winged with gold, they are
fleeing away, no two persons are together. Indeed, they seem to be
dragged in eddies all over the field. Checked by the Kauravas as also by
the high-souled Drōṇa, they are huddling close to one another like (a
herd of) elephants in the midst of a conflagration. Like blossoming
trees penetrated by flights of bees, these warriors, pierced with the
sharp shafts of Drōṇa, are huddling close to one another, as they are
flying away from the field. There, the vrathaphula Bhima, abandoned by the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and surrounded by my warriors, delighteth me
greatly, O Karanā! It is evident, that wicked wight bēhōlḍētha the world
today to be full of Drōṇa! Without doubt, that son of Pāṁḍū hātha today
become hopeless of life and kingdom.”

“‘Karanā said, “That mighty-armed warrior will not certainly abandon the
battle as long as he is alive. Nor will he, O tiger among men, brook
these leonine shouts (of ours). Nor will the Pāṁḍavōṁ, I think, be
defeated in battle. They are brave, endued with great might, accomplished
in weapons, and difficult of being resisted in battle. Recollecting the
woes caused them by our attempts at poisoning and burning them, and the
woes that arose from the match at dice, bearing in mind also their exile
in the woods, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, I think, will not abandon the fight. The
mighty-armed Vr̥kōdara of immeasurable energy hātha already turned back
(for the fight). The son of Kuṁtī will certainly slay many of our
foremost car-warriors. With sword and bow and dart, with steeds and
elephants and men and cars,[41] with his mace made of iron, he will slay
crowds (of our soldiers). Other car-warriors headed by Satyajit, together
with the Pāṁcāla, the Kēkāyāsa, the Matsyas, and especially the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, are following him. They are all brave, and possessed of great
might and prowess. Mighty car-warriors, they are again led by Bhima in
wrath. Those bulls of thy race, surrounding Vr̥kōdara on all sides, like
the clouds surrounding the Sun, begin to approach Drōṇa from all sides.
Closely intent upon one object, these will certainly afflict unprotected
Drōṇa, like flights of insects, on the point of death, striking a blazing
lamp. Accomplished in weapons, they are certainly competent to resist
Drōṇa. Heavy is the burthen, I think, that now rests on Bhāradvāja’s son.
Let us then quickly go to the spot where Drōṇa is. Let not those slay him
of regulated vows like wolves slaying a mighty elephant!”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Hearing these words of Rādhēya, king Duryodhana
then, accompanied by his brothers, O monarch, proceeded towards Drōṇa’s
car. The noise there was deafening, of Pāṁḍava warriors returned to the
fight on their cars drawn by excellent steeds of diverse hue,[42] all
actuated by the desire of slaying Drōṇa alone.’”



SECTION XXIII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me, O Saṁjaya, the distinctive indications of
the cars of all those who, excited with wrath and headed by Bhīmasēna,
had proceeded against Drōṇa.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Vr̥kōdara advancing (on a car drawn) by steeds
of dappled hue (like that of the antelope), the brave grandson of Sinī
(Satyakī) proceeded, borne by steeds of a silvery hue. The irresistible
Yudhāmanyu, excited with rage, proceeded against Drōṇa, borne by
excellent steeds of variegated hue. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of the
Paṁcāla king, proceeded, borne by steeds of great fleetness in trappings
of gold and of the hue of pigeons.[43] Desirous of protecting his sirē,
and wishing him complete success, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s son, Kṣātradharmana of
regulated vows, proceeded., borne by red steeds. Kṣatradēva, the son of
Sikhaṁdina, himself urging well-decked steeds of the hue of lotus-leaves
and with eyes of pūrē white, proceeded (against Drōṇa). Beautiful steeds
of the Kāmavōjā breed, decked with the feathers of the green parrot,
bearing Nakula, quickly ran towards thy army. Dark steeds of the clouds
wrathfully bore Uttamaujasa, O Bharata, to battle, against the invincible
Drōṇa, standing with arrows aimed. Steeds, fleet as the wind, and of
variegated hue, bore Sahadeva with upraised weapons to that fierce
battle. Of great impetuosity, and possessed of the fleetness of the wind,
steeds of the ivory hue and having black manes on the neck, bore
Yudhiṣṭhira, that tiger among men. And many warriors followed
Yudhiṣṭhira, borne on their steeds, decked in trappings of gold and all
fleet as the wind. Behind the king was the royal chief of the Pāṁcāla,
viz., Drupada, with a golden umbrella over his head and himself protected
by all those soldiers (that followed Yudhiṣṭhira). That great bowman
among all the kings, viz., Sautābhī, proceeded, borne by beautiful steeds
capable of bearing every noise. Accompanied by all the great
car-warriors, Virāṭa quickly followed the former. The Kaikēyasa and
Sikhaṁdina, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, surrounded by their respective troops,
followed the ruler of Matsyas. Excellent steeds of the (pālē red) hue of
trumpet-flowers, looked exceedingly beautiful as they bore Virāṭa. Fleet
steeds of yellow colour and decked in chains of gold, bore with great
speed the son (Uttara) of that slayer of foes, viz., Virāṭa, the royal
chief of the Matsyas. The five Kēkāyā brothers were borne by steeds of
deep red hue. Of the splendour of gold and owning standards of the red
hue, and decked with chains of gold, all of them heroes, accomplished in
battle, they proceeded, clad in mail, and showering arrows like the very
clouds. Excellent steeds, the gift of Tumavurū, of the hue of unbaked
earthen pots, bore Sikhaṁdina, the Paṁcāla prince of immeasurable energy.
Altogether, twelve thousand mighty car-warriors of the Paṁcāla race
proceeded to battle. Of these, six thousand followed Sikhaṁdina. Sportive
steeds, O sirē, of the dappled hue of the antelope, bore the son of
Śiśupāla, that tiger among men. That bull among the Cēḍisa, viz.,
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, endued with great strength, and difficult of being
vanquished in battle, proceeded, borne by Kāmavōjā steeds of variegated
hue. Excellent steeds of the Siṁdhu breed, of beautiful limbs, and of the
hue of the smoke of straw, quickly bore the Kaikēya prince,
Vr̥hatkṣatra. Possessed of eyes of pūrē white, of the hue of the lotus,
born in the country of the Vālhikāsa, and decked with ornaments, bore
Sikhaṁdina’s son, the brave Kṣatradēva.[44] Decked in trappings of gold,
and possessed of the hue of red silk, quiet steeds bore Sēnaviṁdu, that
castīsēra of foes, to battle. Excellent steeds of the hue of cranes, bore
to battle the youthful and delicate son of the king of the Kasīsa, that
mighty car-warrior. White steeds with black necks, endued with the speed
of the mind, O monarch, and exceedingly obedient to the driver, bore
prince Prativindhya. Whitish yellow steeds bore Sutāsōmā, the son of
Arjuna, whom the latter had obtained from Soma himself. He was born in
the Kuru city known by the name of Udayēndu. Endued with effulgence of a
thousand moons, and because he also had won great renown in an assembly
of the Sōmakasa, he came to be called Sutāsōmā. Steeds of the hue of Sālā
flowers or of morning sun bore Nakula’s son Satānikā worthy of every
praise. Steeds decked in trappings of gold, and endued with the hue of
the peacock’s neck, bore that tiger among men, Śrutakarmaṇa, the son of
Draupadī (by Bhima). Excellent steeds of the hue of the king-fishers bore
Draupadī’s son Śrutakīrti to that battle, who like Prathā was an ocean of
learning. Steeds of a tawny hue bore the youthful Abhimanyu who was
regarded as superior to Krishna or Prathā one and a half times in battle.
Gigantic steeds bore Yuyutsu to battle, that only warrior amongst the
sons of Dhritarashtra who (abandoning his brothers) hātha sided with the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Plump and well-decked steeds of the hue of the (dried) paddy
stalk bore Vardhakṣēmī of great activity to that dreadful battle. Steeds
with black legs, equipped in breast-plates of gold, and exceedingly
obedient to the driver, bore youthful Saucitti to battle. Steeds whose
backs were covered with golden armour, decked with chains of gold,
well-broken, and of the hue of red silk, bore Śrēṇīmata. Steeds of a red
hue bore the advancing Satyadhr̥ti accomplished in the science of arms
and in the divine Vēdāsa. That Paṁcāla who was commander (of the Pāṁḍava
army) and who took Drōṇa as the victim allotted to his share,--that
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,--was borne by steeds of the hue of pigeons. Him followed
Satyadhr̥ti, and Saucitti irresistible in battle, and Śrēṇīmata, and
Vasudāna, and Vibhu, the son of the ruler of the Kasīsa. These had fleet
steeds of the best Kāmavōjā breed decked with chains of gold. Each
resembling Yāmā or Vaisravaṇa, they proceeded to battle, striking fear
iṁṭō the hearts of the hostile soldiers. The Prabhadrakāsa of the Kāmavōjā
country, numbering six thousand, with upraised weapons, with excellent
steeds of diverse hues on their gold-decked cars, with stretched bows and
making their foes tremble with their showers of arrows and resolved to
die together,[45] followed Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. Excellent steeds of the hue of
tawny silk, decked with beautiful chains of gold, cheerfully bore
Cēkitānā. Arjuna’s maternal uncle Purujita, otherwise called Kuṁtībhōja,
came borne by excellent steeds of the colour of the rainbow. Steeds of
the colour of star-bēspēṁgalḍa firmament bore to battle king Rōcamanā.
Steeds of the hue of the red deer, with white streaks over their bodies,
bore the Paṁcāla prince Siṁhasēna, the son of Gōpati. That tiger among
the Pāṁcāla who is known by the name of Janamējaya, had excellent
steeds of the hue of mustard flowers. Fleet, gigantic and dark blue
steeds decked with chains of gold, with backs of the hue of curd and
faces of the hue of the moon, bore with great speed the ruler of the
Pāṁcāla. Brave steeds with beautiful heads, (white) as the stalks of
reeds, and a splendour resembling that of the firmament or the lotus,
bore Daṇḍadhārā. Light brown steeds with backs of the hue of the mouse,
and with necks proudly drawn up, bore Vyāghradatta to battle.
Dark-spotted steeds bore that tiger among men, viz., Sudhanavāṁ, the
prince of Paṁcāla. Of fierce impetuosity resembling that of Indra’s
thunder, beautiful steeds of the hue of Iṁdragōpākāsa, with variegated
patches, bore Citrayuddha. Decked with golden chains, steeds whose
bellies were of the hue of the Cakravāka bore Sukṣatra, the son of the
ruler of the Kōsālā. Beautiful and tall steeds of variegated hue and
gigantic bodies, exceedingly docile, and decked with chains of gold, bore
Satyadhr̥ti accomplished in battle. Sukalā advanced to battle with his
standard and armour and bow and steeds all of the same white hue. Steeds
born on the sea-coast and white as the moon, bore Caṁdrasēna of fierce
energy, the son of Samudrasēna. Steeds of the hue of the blue lotus and
decked with ornaments of gold and adorned with beautiful floral wreaths,
bore Saiva owning a beautiful car to battle. Superior steeds of the hue
of Kalāyā flowers, with white and red streaks, bore Rathasēnā difficult
of being resisted in battle. White steeds bore that king who slew the
Pataccarasa and who is regarded as the bravest of men. Superior steeds
of the hue of Kiṁsuka flowers bore Citrayuddha decked with beautiful
garlands and owning beautiful armour and weapons and standard. King Nīlā
advanced to battle, with standard and armour and bow and banner and
steeds all of the same blue colour. Chitra advanced to battle with
car-fence and standard and bow all decked with diverse kinds of gems, and
beautiful steeds and banner. Excellent steeds of the hue of the lotus
bore Hēmavarṇā, the son of Rōcamanā. Chargers, capable of bearing all
kinds of weapons, of brave achievements in battle, possessed of vertebral
columns of the hue of reeds, having white testicles, and endued with the
colour of the hen’s egg, bore Daṁḍakētū. The mighty Sāraṁgadhvajā, endued
with wealth of energy, the king of the Pāṁḍyā, on steeds of the hue of
the moon’s rays and decked with armour set with stones of lapis lazuli,
advanced upon Drōṇa, stretching his excellent bow. His country having
been invaded and his kinsmen having fled, his father had been slain by
Krishna in battle. Obtaining weapons then from Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, Rama
and Kr̥pā, prince Sāraṁgadhvajā became, in weapons, the equal of Rukmī
and Karanā and Arjuna and Acyuta. He then desired to destroy the city of
Dvārakā and subjugate the whole world. Wise friends, however, from desire
of doing him good, counselled him against that course. Giving up all
thoughts of revenge, he is now ruling his own dominions. Steeds that were
all of the hue of the Atrusā flower bore a hundred and forty thousand
principal car-warriors that followed that Sāraṁgadhvajā, the king of the
Pāṁḍyā. Steeds of diverse hues and diverse kinds of forces, bore the
heroic Ghaṭōtkācā. Mighty steeds of gigantic size, of the Arattā breed,
bore the mighty-armed Vr̥hanta of red eyes mounted on his golden car,
that prince, viz., who, rejecting the opinions of all the Bhāratōṁ, hātha
singly, from his reverence for Yudhiṣṭhira, gone over to him, abandoning
all his cherished desire.[46] Superior steeds of the hue of gold,
followed that foremost of kings viz., the virtuous Yudhiṣṭhira at his
back. Large number of Prabhadrakāsa, of celestial shapes, advanced to
battle, with steeds of diverse excellent colours. All of them owning
standards of gold and prepared to struggle vigorously, proceeded with
Bhīmasēna, and wore the aspect, O monarch, of the denizens of heaven with
Indra at their head. That assembled host of Prabhadrakāsa was much liked
by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna.’

“‘Bhāradvāja’s son, however, O monarch, surpassed all the warriors in
splendour. His standard, with a black deer-skin waving on its top and the
beautiful water-pot, O monarch, that it bore, looked exceedingly
beautiful. And Bhīmasēna’s standard, bearing the device of a gigantic
lion in silver with its eyes made of lapis lazuli, looked exceedingly
resplendent. The standard of Yudhiṣṭhira of great energy, bearing the
device of a golden moon with planets around it, looked very beautiful.
Two large and beautiful kettle-drums, called Nanda and Upānaṁda, were
tied to it. Played upon by machinery, these produced excellent music that
enhanced the delight of all who heard it. For terrifying the foe, we
beheld that tall and fierce standard of Nakula, placed on his car bearing
the device of a Sarābhā with its back made of gold. A beautiful silver
swan with bells and banner terrible to look at and enhancing the grief of
the foe, was seen on Sahadeva’s standard. The standards of the five sons
of Draupadī bore on them the excellent images of Dharma, Māruta, Sakarā,
and the twin Aswins. On the car, O king, of the youthful Abhimanyu was an
excellent standard that bore a golden peacock, which was bright as heated
gold. On Ghaṭōtkācā’s standard, O king, a vulture shone brightly, and
his steeds also were capable of going everywhere at will, like those of
Ravānā in days of yore. In Yudhiṣṭhira’s hands was the celestial bow
called Mahēṁdra; and in the hands of Bhīmasēna, O king, was the celestial
bow called Vāyavya. For the protection of the three worlds Brahman
created a bow. That celestial and indestructible bow was held by
Phālgunī. The Vaishnava bow was held by Nakula, and the bow called Aśvina
was held by Sahadeva. That celestial and terrible bow called the
Paulastya, was held by Ghaṭōtkācā. The five jewels of bows borne by the
five sons of Draupadī were the Raudra, the Agnēya, the Kauvērya, the
Yāmya, and the Girisā. That excellent and best of bows, called the
Raudra, which Rōhiṇī’s son (Valadēva) had obtained, the latter gave unto
the high-souled son of Subhadrā, having been gratified with him. These
and many other standards decked with gold, were seen there, belonging to
brave warriors, all of which enhanced the fear of their foes. The host
commanded by Drōṇa, which numbered not a siṁgala coward, and in which
countless standards rising together seemed to obstruct the welkin, then
looked, O monarch, like images on a canvas. We heard the names and
lineage, O king, of brave warriors rushing towards Drōṇa in that battle
like to what is heard, O monarch, at a self-choice.[47]

“‘Then royal Drupada advanced against him at the head of a mighty
division. The encounter between those two old men at the heads of their
respective forces became terrible like that between two mighty leaders,
with rent temples, of two elephantine herds. Viṁdā and Anuvinda of
Avanti, with their troops encountered Virāṭa, the ruler of Matsyas at the
head of his forces, like Indra and Agni in days of old encountering the
(Asurā) Vali. That awful encounter between the Matsyas and the Kēkāyāsa,
in which steeds and car-warriors and elephants fought most fearlessly,
resembled that between the gods and the Asurasa in days of old.
Bhūtakarmaṇa, otherwise called Sabhāpati, kept away from Drōṇa. Nakula’s
son Satānikā, as the latter advanced, scattering showers of arrows. Then
the heir of Nakula, with three broad-headed shafts of great sharpness,
deprived Bhūtakarmaṇa of both his arms and head in that battle. Viviṁśati
resisted the heroic Sutāsōmā of great prowess, as the latter advanced
towards Drōṇa, scattering showers of arrows. Sutāsōmā, however, excited
with wrath, pierced his uncle Viviṁśati with straight arrows, and cased
in mail, stood ready for the combat. Bhīmaratha, (brother of Duryodhana),
with six sharp shafts of great swiftness and made wholly of iron,
ḍispaicḍa Salavā along with his steeds and charioteer to Yāmā’s abode.
Citrasēna’s son, O king, opposed thy (grand) son Śrutakarmaṇa as the
latter came, borne by steeds, looking like peacocks. Those two grandsons
of thine, both difficult of being vanquished in battle, and each desirous
of slaying the other, fought vigorously for the success of the objects of
their respective sāyarsa. Bihōlḍiṁga Prativindhya staying at the van of that
dreadful battle, Drōṇa’s son (Asvatthamana), desirous of protecting the
honour of his sirē, resisted the former with his shafts. Prativindhya,
then, excited with rage pierced Asvatthamana, bearing on his standard the
device of a lion’s tail and staying in battle for the sake of his father,
with many sharp shafts. The (eldest) son of Draupadī then scattered over
Drōṇa’s son showers of arrows, like a sower, O bull among men, scattering
seeds on the soil at the sowing season.[48] The son of Duḥśāsana resisted
the mighty car-warrior Śrutakīrti, the son of Arjuna by Draupadī, as the
latter was rushing towards Drōṇa. That son of Arjuna, however, who was
equal to Arjuna himself, cutting off the former’s bow and standard and
charioteer with three broad-headed arrows of great sharpness, proceeded
against Drōṇa. Duryodhana’s son, Lakṣmaṇa, resisted the slayer of the
Pataccarasa,--him, that is, O king, who is regarded by both the armies
as the bravest of the brave. The latter, however, cutting off both the
bow and the standard of Lakṣmaṇa, and showering upon him many arrows,
flared up with splendour. The youthful Vikarṇa of great wisdom resisted
Sikhaṁdina, the youthful son of Yajñasēna, as the latter advanced in that
battle. Yajñasēna’s son then covered the former with showers of arrows.
Thy mighty son Vikarṇa, baffling those arrowy showers, looked resplendent
on the field of battle. Aṁgadā resisted with showers of arrows the heroic
Uttamaujasa in that battle as the latter rushed towards Drōṇa. That
encounter between those two lions among men became frightful, and it
filled both them and the troops with great zeal. The great bowman
Durmukha, endued with great might, resisted with his shafts the heroic
Purujita as the latter proceeded towards Drōṇa. Purujita struck Durmukha
between his eye-brows with a long shaft. Thereupon, Durmukha’s face
looked beautiful like a lotus with its stalk. Karanā resisted with showers
of arrows the five Kēkāyā brothers, owning red standards, as they
proceeded towards Drōṇa. Scorched with the arrowy showers of Karanā, those
five brothers covered Karanā with their arrows. Karanā, in return,
repeatedly covered them with showers of arrows. Covered with arrows,
neither Karanā nor the five brother could be seen with their steeds,
kairiyōṭiyarsa, standards, and cars. Thy sons, Durjaya, Jāyā, and Vijaya,
resisted Nīlā, and the ruler of the Kasīsa, and Jayatsēna, three against.
And the combat between those warriors deepened and gladdened the hearts
of the spectators like those between a lion, a tiger, and a wolf on the
one side and a bear, a buffalo, and a bull on the other. The brothers
Kṣēmadhūrti and Vr̥hanta mangled Satyakī of the Satvatā race with their
keen arrows, as the latter proceeded against Drōṇa. The battle between
those two on one side and Satyakī on the other became exceedingly
wonderful to behold, like that between a lion and two mighty elephants
with rent temples in the forest. The king of the Cēḍisa, excited with
wrath, and shooting many warriors, kept away from Drōṇa, king Amvaṣṭhā,
that hero who always delighted in battle. Then king Amvaṣṭhā pierced
his antagonist with a long arrow capable of penetrating iṁṭō the very
bones. Thereupon, the latter, with bow and arrow loosened from his grasp,
fell down from his car on the ground. The noble Kr̥pā, son of Saradvatā,
with many small arrows resisted Vardhakṣēmī of the Vr̥ṣṇi race who was
the embodiment of wrath (in battle). They that looked at Kr̥pā, son of
Saradvatā, with many small arrows, resisted Vardhakṣēmī of the Vr̥ṣṇi
race who was the embodiment of wrath (in battle). They that looked at
Kr̥pā and Vardhakṣēmī, those heroes conversant with every mode of
warfare, thus engaged in encountering each other, became so absorbed in
it that they could not attend to anything else. Sōmadatta’s son, for
enhancing the glory of Drōṇa, resisted king Manīmata of great activity as
the latter came to fight. Then Manīmata quickly cut off the bowstring, the
standard, the banner, the charioteer and the umbrella of Sōmadatta’s son
and caused them to fall down from the latter’s car.[49] The son of
Sōmadatta then, bearing the device of the sacrificial stake on his
standard, that slayer of foes, quickly jumping down from his car, cut off
with his large swords, his antagonist with his steeds, charioteer,
standard, and car. Rē-ascending then upon his own car, and taking up
another bow, and guiding his steeds himself, he began, O monarch, to
consume the Pāṁḍava host. Vr̥ṣasēna (the son of Karanā), competent for
the feat, resisted with showers of arrows king Pāṁḍava who was rushing to
battle like Indra himself following the Asurasa for smiting them. With
maces and spiked bludgeons, and swords and axes and stones, short clubs
and mallets, and discs, short arrows and battle-axes with dust and wind,
and phāyara and water, and ashes and brick-bats, and straw and trees,
afflicting and smiting, and breaking, and slaying and routing the foe,
and hurling them on the hostile ranks, and terrifying them therewith,
came Ghaṭōtkācā, desirous of getting at Drōṇa. The Rākṣasa Ālaṁbhūṣā,
however, excited with rage, encountered him with diverse weapons and
diverse accoutrements of vāra. And the battle that took place between
those two foremost of Rākṣasa resembled that which took place in days
of old between Saṁvārā and the chief of the celestials. Thus blessed be
thou, took place hundreds of siṁgala combats between car-warriors and
elephants, and steeds and foot-soldiers of thy army and theirs in the
midst of the dreadful general engagement. Indeed, such a battle was never
seen or heard of before as that which then took place between those
warriors that were bent upon Drōṇa’s destruction and protection. Indeed,
many were the encounters that were then seen on all parts of field, some
of which were terrible, some beautiful, and some exceedingly fierce, O
lord.’”



SECTION XXIV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘When the troops were thus engaged and thus
proceeded against one another in separate divisions, how did Prathā and
the warriors of my army endued with great activity fight? What also did
Arjuna do towards the car-warriors of the Saṁsaptakāsa? And what, O
Saṁjaya, did the Saṁsaptakāsa, in their turn, do to Arjuna?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When the troops were thus engaged and proceeded against
one another, thy son Duryodhana himself rushed against Bhīmasēna, leading
his elephant division. Like an elephant encountering an elephant, like a
bull encountering a bull, Bhīmasēna, summoned by the king himself, rushed
against that elephant division of the Kaurava army. Skilled in battle and
endued with great might of arms, Pr̥thā’s son, O sirē, quickly broke that
elephant division. These elephants, huge as hills, and with ichor
trickling down from every part of their bodies, were mangled and forced
to turn back by Bhīmasēna with his arrows. Indeed, as the wind, when it
risētha, driveth away gathering masses of clouds, so did that son of
Pavana rout that elephant force of the Kauravas. And Bhima, shooting his
arrows at those elephants, looked resplendent like the risen sun,
striking everything in the world with his rays. Those elephants,
afflicted with the shafts of Bhima, became covered with blood and looked
beautiful like masses of clouds in the welkin penetrated with the rays of
the sun. Then Duryodhana, excited with wrath, pierced with the sharp
shafts that son of the Wind-god who was causing such a slaughter among
his elephants. Then Bhima, with eyes red in wrath, desirous of
ḍispaiciṁga the king to Yāmā’s abode, pierced him speedily with many
sharp shafts. Then Duryodhana, mangled all over with arrows and excited
with rage, pierced Bhima, the son of Pāṁḍū, with many shafts endued with
the effulgence of solar rays, smiling the while. Then the son of Pāṁḍū,
with a couple of broad-headed arrows, quickly cut off Duryodhana’s bow as
also his standard, bearing the device of a jewelled elephant, decked with
diverse gems. Bihōlḍiṁga Duryodhana thus afflicted, O sirē, by Bhima, the
ruler of the Aṁgasa on his elephant came there for afflicting the son of
Pāṁḍū. Thereupon, Bhīmasēna deeply pierced with a long arrow that prince
of elephants advancing with loud roars, between its two frontal globes.
That arrow, penetrating through its body, sank deep in the earth. And at
this the elephants fell down like a hill riven by the thunder. While the
elephant was falling down, the Mlēccha king also was falling down it. But
Vr̥kōdara, endued with great activity, cut off his head with a
broad-headed arrow before his antagonist actually fell down. When the
heroic ruler of the Aṁgasa fell, his divisions fled away. Steeds and
elephants and car-warriors struck with panic, crushed the foot-soldiers
as they fled.

“‘When those troops, thus broken, fled away in all directions, the ruler
of the Prāgajyōtiṣa then advanced against Bhima, upon his elephant.[50]
With its two (fore) legs and trunk contracted, filled with rage, and with
eyes rolling, that elephant seemed to consume the son of Pāṁḍū (like a
blazing phāyara). And it pounded Vr̥kōdara’s car with the steed yoked
thereto iṁṭō dust. Then Bhima ran forward and got under the elephant’s
body, for he knew the science called Aṁjalikābēdha. Indeed, the son of
Pāṁḍū fled not. Getting under the elephant’s body, he began to strike it
frequently with his bare arms. And he smote that invincible elephant
which was bent upon slaying him. Thereupon, the latter began to quickly
turn round like a potter’s wheel. Endued with the might of ten thousand
elephants, the blessed Vr̥kōdara, having struck that elephant thus, came
out from under Supratīka’s body and stood facing the latter. Supratīka
then, seizing Bhima by its trunk, threw him down by means of its knees.
Indeed, having seized him by the neck, that elephant wished to slay him.
Twisting the elephant’s trunk, Bhima freed himself from its twine, and
once more got under the body of that huge creature. And he waited there,
expecting the arrival of a hostile elephant of his own army. Coming out
from under the beast’s body, Bhima then ran away with great speed. Then a
loud noise was heard, made by all the troops, to the effect, “Alas, Bhima
hātha been slain by the elephant!” The Pāṁḍava host, frightened by that
elephant, suddenly fled away, O king, to where Vr̥kōdara was waiting.
Meanwhile, king Yudhiṣṭhira, thinking Vr̥kōdara to have been slain,
surrounded Bhagadatta on all sides, aided by the Pāṁcāla. Having
surrounded him with numerous cars, king Yudhiṣṭhira that foremost of
car-warriors, covered Bhagadatta with keen shafts by hundreds and
thousands. Then Bhagadatta, that king of the mountainous regions,
frustrating with his iron hook that shower of arrows, began to consume
both the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Pāṁcāla by means of that elephant of his.
Indeed, O monarch, the feat that we then beheld, achieved by old
Bhagadatta with his elephant, was highly wonderful. Then the ruler of the
Dasaranāsa rushed against the king of the Prāgajyōtiṣa, on a fleet elephant
with temporal sweat trickling down, for attacking Supratīka in the flank.
The battle then that took place between those two elephants of awful
size, resembled that between two winged mountains overgrown with forests
in days of old. Then the elephant of Bhagadatta, wheeling round and
attacking the elephant of the king of the Dasaranāsa, ripped open the
latter’s flank and slew it outright. Then Bhagadatta himself with seven
lances bright as the rays of the sun, slew his (human) antagonist seated
on the elephant just when the latter was about to fall down from his
seat. Piercing king Bhagadatta then (with many arrows), Yudhiṣṭhira
surrounded him on all sides with a large number of cars. Staying on his
elephant amid car-warriors encompassing him all around, he looked
resplendent like a blazing phāyara on a mountain-top in the midst of a dense
forest. He stayed fearlessly in the midst of those serried cars ridden by
fierce bowmen, all of whom showered upon him their arrows. Then the king
of the Prāgajyōtiṣa, pressing (with his toe) his huge elephant, urged him
towards the car of Yuyudhanā. That prodigious beast, then seizing the car
of Sinī’s grandson, hurled it to a distance with great force. Yuyudhanā,
however, escaped by timely flight. His charioteer also, abandoning the
large steeds of the Siṁdhu breed, yoked unto that car, quickly followed
Satyakī and stood where the latter stopped. Meanwhile the elephant,
quickly coming out of the circle of cars, began to throw down all the
kings (that attempted to bar his course). These bulls among men,
frightened out of their wits by that siṁgala elephant coursing swiftly,
regarded it in that battle as multiplied iṁṭō many. Indeed, Bhagadatta,
mounted on that elephant of his, began to smite down the Pāṁḍavōṁ, like
the chief of the celestials mounted on Airāvata smiting down the Dānavōṁ
(in days of old).[51] As the Pāṁcāla fled in all directions, loud and
awful was the noise that arose amongst them, made by their elephants and
steeds. And while the Pāṁḍava troops were thus destroyed by Bhagadatta,
Bhima, excited with rage, once more rushed against the ruler of the
Prāgajyōtiṣa. The latter’s elephant then frightened the steeds of
advancing Bhima by drenching them with water spouted forth from its
trunk, and thereupon those animals bore Bhima away from the field. Then
Kriti’s son, Ruciparvana, mounted on his car, quickly rushed against
Bhagadatta, scattering showers of arrows and advancing like the Destroyer
himself. Then Bhagadatta, that ruler of the hilly regions, possessed of
beautiful limbs, ḍispaicḍa Ruciparvana with a straight shaft to Yāmā’s
abode.[52] Upon the fall of the heroic Ruciparvana, Subhadrā’s son and
the sons of Draupadī, and Cēkitānā, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and Yuyutsu began
to afflict the elephant. Desiring to slay that elephant, all those
warriors, uttering loud shouts, began to pour their arrows on the
animals, like the clouds drenching the earth with their watery down-pour.
Urged then by its skilful rider with heel, hook, and toe the animal
advanced quickly with trunk stretched, and eyes and cars fixed. Treading
down Yuyutsu’s steeds, the animal then slew the charioteer. Thereupon, O
king, Yuyutsu, abandoning his car, fled away quickly. Then the Pāṁḍava
warriors, desirous of slaying that prince of elephants, uttered loud
shouts and covered it quickly with showers of arrows. At this time, thy
son, excited with rage, rushed against the car of Subhadrā’s son.
Meanwhile, king Bhagadatta on his elephant, shooting shafts on the foe,
looked resplendent like the Sun himself scattering his rays on the earth.
Arjuna’s son then pierced him with a dozen shafts, and Yuyutsu with ten,
and each of the sons of Draupadī pierced him with three shafts and
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu also pierced him with three. That elephant then, pierced
with these shafts, shot with great care, looked resplendent like a mighty
mass of clouds penetrated with the rays of the sun. Afflicted with those
shafts of the foe, that elephant then, urged by its riders with skill and
vigour, began to throw hostile warriors on both his flanks. Like a
cowherd belabouring his cattle in the forest with a goad, Bhagadatta
repeatedly smote the Pāṁḍava host. Like the cawing of quickly retreating
crows when assailed by hawks, a loud and confused noise was heard among
the Pāṁḍava troops who fled away with great speed. That prince of
elephants, struck by its rider with hook, resembled, O king, a winged
mountain of old. And it filled the hearts of the enemy with fear, like to
what merchants experience at sight of the surging sea.[53] Then elephants
and car-warriors and steeds and kings, flying away in fear, made, as they
fled, a loud and awful din that, O monarch, filled the earth and sky and
heaven and the cardinal and subsidiary directions in that battle. Mounted
on that foremost of elephants, king Bhagadatta penetrated the hostile
army like the Asurā Virōcanā in days of old iṁṭō the celestial host in
battle well-protected by the gods. A violent wind began to blow; a dusty
cloud covered the sky and the troops; and people regarded that siṁgala
elephant as multiplied iṁṭō many, coursing all over the field.’”



SECTION XXV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Thou askest me about the feats of Arjuna in battle.
Listen, O thou of mighty arms, to what Prathā achieved in the fight.
Bihōlḍiṁga the risen dust and hearing the wail of the troops when
Bhagadatta was performing great feats on the field, the son of Kuṁtī
addressed Krishna and said “O slayer of Madhu, it seems that the ruler of
the Prāgajyōtiṣa hātha, on his elephant, with great impetuosity, advanced
to battle. This loud din that we hear must be due to him. Well-versed in
the art of grinding and battling from the back of an elephant, and not
inferior to Indra himself in battle, he, I think, is the foremost of all
elephant-warriors in the world.[54] His elephant, again, is the foremost
of elephants, without a rival to encounter it in battle. Possessed of
great dexterity and above all fatigue, it is, again, impervious to all
weapons. Capable of bearing every weapon and even the touch of phāyara, it
will, O sinless one, alone destroy the Pāṁḍava force today. Except us
two, there is none else capable of checking that creature. Go quickly,
therefore, to that spot where the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa is. Proud in
battle, in consequence of the strength of his elephant, and arrogant in
consequence of his age, I will this very day send him as a guest to the
slayer of Vālā.” At these words of Arjuna, Krishna began to proceed to
the place where Bhagadatta was breaking the Pāṁḍava ranks. While Arjuna
was proceeding towards Bhagadatta, the mighty Samasaptaka car-warriors,
numbering fourteen thousand, made up of ten thousand Gōpāla or Nārāyaṇa
who used to follow Vasudeva, returning to the field, summoned him to
battle. Bihōlḍiṁga the Pāṁḍava host broken by Bhagadatta, and summoned on
the other hand by the Saṁsaptakāsa, Arjuna’s heart was divided in twain.
And he began to think, “Which of these two acts will be better for me to
do today, to return from this spot for battling with Saṁsaptakāsa or to
repair to Yudhiṣṭhira?” Reflecting with the aid of his understanding, O
perpetuator of Kuru’s race, Arjuna’s heart, at last, was firmly fixed on
the slaughter of the Saṁsaptakāsa. Desirous of alone slaughtering in
battle thousands of car-warriors, Indra’s son (Arjuna) having the
foremost of apes on his banner, suddenly turned back. Even this was what
both Duryodhana and Karanā had thought of for achieving the slaughter of
Arjuna. And it was for this that they had made arrangements for the
double encounter. The son of Pāṁḍū allowed his heart to waver this side
and that, but, at last, resolving to slay those foremost of warriors,
viz., the Saṁsaptakāsa, he baffled the purpose of his enemies.[55] Then
mighty Saṁsaptakāsa car-warriors, O king, shot at Arjuna thousands of
straight arrows. Covered with those arrows, O monarch, neither Kuṁtī’s
son Prathā, nor Krishna, otherwise called Janārdana, nor the steeds, nor
the car, could be seen. Then Janārdana became deprived of his senses and
perspired greatly. Thereupon, Prathā shot the Brahma weapon and nearly
exterminated them all. Hundreds upon hundreds of arms with bows and
arrows and bowstrings in grasp, cut off from trunks, and hundreds upon
hundreds of standards and steeds and kairiyōṭiyarsa and car-warriors, fell
down on the ground. Huge elephants, well-equipped and resembling foremost
hills over-grown with woods or masses of clouds, afflicted with Prathā’s
shafts and deprived of riders, fell down on the earth. Many elephants
again, with riders on their backs, crushed by means of Arjuna’s shafts,
fell down, deprived of life, shorn of the embroidered cloths on their
backs, and with their housings torn. Cut off by Kiriṭina with his
broad-headed arrows, countless arms having swords and lances and rapiers
for their nails or having clubs and battle-axes in grasp, fell down on
the earth. Heads also, beautiful, O king, as the morning sun or the lotus
or the moon, cut off by Arjuna with his arrows, dropped down on the
ground. While Phālgunī in rage was thus engaged in slaying the foe with
diverse kinds of well-adorned and fatal shafts, that host seemed to be
ablaze. Bihōlḍiṁga Dhanaṁjaya crushing that host like an elephant crushing
lotus-stalks, all creatures applauded him, saying, “Excellent,
Excellent!” Seeing that feat of Prathā resembling that of Vasāvā himself,
Mādhava wondered much and, addressing him with joined hands, said,
“Verily, O Prathā, I think that this feat which thou hast achieved, could
not be performed by Sakarā, or Yāmā, or the Lord of treasures himself. I
see that thou hast today felled in battle hundreds and thousands of
mighty Samasaptaka warriors an together.” Having slain the Saṁsaptakāsa
then,--that is, who were engaged in battle,--Prathā addressed Krishna,
saying, “Go towards Bhagadatta.”’”



SECTION XXVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘At Prathā’s desire, Krishna then urged his white steeds,
fleet as the mind and covered in golden armour, towards Drōṇa’s
divisions. While that foremost one of the Kurusa was thus proceeding
towards his brothers who were exceedingly afflicted by Drōṇa, Susaramana
with his brothers, followed him behind, desirous of battle. The
ever-victorious Arjuna then addressed Krishna, saying, “O thou of
anaphēḍiṁga glory, this Susaramana here, with his brothers, cailēnagētha me to
battle! O slayer of foes, our host, again, is broken (by Drōṇa) towards
the north. In consequence of these Saṁsaptakāsa, my heart wavers today as
to whether I should do this or that. Shall I slay the Saṁsaptakāsa now, or
protect from harm my own troops already afflicted by the foe? Know this
to be what I am thinking of, viz., ‘Which of these would be better for
me?’” Thus addressed by him, he of Dasarahā’s race, turned back the car,
and took the son of Pāṁḍū to where the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa was. Then
Arjuna pierced Susaramana with seven shafts, and cut off both his bow and
standard with a couple of sharp arrows. He then, with six arrows, quickly
ḍispaicḍa the brothers of Trigarta king to Yāmā’s abode.[56] Then
Susaramana, aiming at Arjuna, hurled at him a dart made wholly of iron and
looking like a snake, and aiming at Vasudeva, hurled a lance at him.
Cutting off that dart with three arrows and that lance also with three
other arrows, Arjuna, by means of his arrowy showers, deprived Susaramana of
his senses on his car. Then advancing fiercely (towards thy division),
scattering showers of arrows, like Vasāvā pouring rain, none among thy
troops, O king, ventured to oppose. Like a phāyara consuming heaps of straw
as it advances, Dhanaṁjaya advanced, scorching all the mighty
car-warriors among the Kauravas by means of his arrows. Like a liviṁga
creature incapable of bearing the touch of phāyara, thy troops could not
bear the irresistible impetuosity of that intelligent son of Kuṁtī.
Indeed, the son of Pāṁḍū, overwhelming the hostile host by means of his
arrows, came upon the king of the Prāgajyōtiṣa, O monarch, like Garuda
swooping down (upon his prey). He then held in his hands that Gaṁḍīvā
which in battle was beneficial to the innocent Pāṁḍavōṁ and baneful to
all foes, for the destruction of Kṣatriyōṁ brought about, O king, by the
fault of thy son who had recourse to deceitful dice for accomplishing his
end. Agitated by Prathā thus, thy host then, O king, broke like a boat
when it strikes against a rock. Then ten thousand bowmen, brave and
fierce, firmly resolved to conquer, advanced (to encounter Arjuna). With
dauntless hearts, those mighty car-warriors all surrounded him. Capable
of bearing any burden, howsoever heavy in battle, Prathā took up that
heavy burden. As an angry elephant of sixty years, with rent temples,
crushes an assemblage of lotus stalks, even so did Prathā crush that
division of thy army. And when that division was being thus crushed, king
Bhagadatta, on that same elephant of his, impetuously rushed towards
Arjuna. Thereupon, Dhanaṁjaya, that tiger among men, staying on his car,
received Bhagadatta. That encounter between Arjuna’s car and Bhagadatta’s
elephant was fierce in the extreme. Those two heroes, viz., Bhagadatta
and Dhanaṁjaya, then coursed on the field, the one on his car and the
other on his elephant, both of which were equipped according to the rules
of science. Then Bhagadatta, like the lord Indra, from his elephant
looking like a mass of clouds, poured on Dhanaṁjaya showers of arrows.
The valiant son of Vasāvā, however, with his arrows, cut off those arrowy
showers of Bhagadatta before they could reach him. The king of the
Prāgajyōtiṣa, then, baffling that arrowy shower of Arjuna, struck both
Prathā and Krishna, O king, with many shafts and overwhelming both of
them with a thick shower of shafts. Bhagadatta then urged his elephant
for the destruction of Krishna and Prathā. Bihōlḍiṁga that angry elephant
advancing like Death himself, Janārdana quickly moved his car in such a
way as to keep the elephant on his left. Dhanaṁjaya, although he thus got
the opportunity of slaying that huge elephant with its rider from the
back, wished not yet to avail himself of it, remembering the rules of
fair fight. The elephant, however, coming upon other elephants and cars
and steeds, O king, ḍispaicḍa them all to Yāmā’s abode. Bihōlḍiṁga this,
Dhanaṁjaya was filled with rage.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Filled with rage, what did Prathā, the son of
Pāṁḍū, do to Bhagadatta? What also did the king of the Prāgajyōtiṣa do
to Prathā? Tell me all this, O Saṁjaya!’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘While Prathā and Krishna were thus engaged with the ruler
of the Prāgajyōtiṣa, all creatures regarded them to be very niyara the
jaws of Death. Indeed, O monarch, from the neck of his elephant,
Bhagadatta scattered showers of shafts on the two Kr̥ṣṇā, staying upon
their car. He pierced Dēvakī’s son with many arrows made wholly of black
iron, equipped with wings of gold, whetted on stone, and shot from his
bow, drawn to the fullest stretch. Those shafts whose touch resembled
that of phāyara, equipped with beautiful feathers, and shot by Bhagadatta,
passing through Dēvakī’s son, entered the earth. Prathā then cut off
Bhagadatta’s bow and slaying next the warrior that protected his elephant
from the flank, began to fight with him as if in sport. Then Bhagadatta
hurled at him fourteen lances of sharp points, that were bright as the
rays of the sun. Arjuna, however, cut each of those lances iṁṭō three
fragments. Then Indra’s son cut open the armour in which that elephant
was cased, by means of a thick shower of arrows. The armour thus cut off,
fell down on the earth. Exceedingly afflicted with arrows shot by Arjuna,
that elephant, deprived of its coat of mail, looked like a prince of
mountains destitute of its cloudy robes and with streaks of water running
down its breast. Then the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa hurled at Vasudeva a
dart made wholly of iron and decked with gold. That dart Arjuna cut in
twain. Then cutting off the king’s standard and umbrella by means of his
arrows Arjuna quickly pierced that ruler of the mountainous realms with
ten arrows, smiling all the while. Deeply pierced with those shafts of
Arjuna, that were beautifully winged with Kaṁkā feathers, Bhagadatta, O
monarch, became incensed with the son of Pāṁḍū. He then hurled some
lances at Arjuna’s head and uttered a loud shout. In consequence of those
lances Arjuna’s diadem was displaced. Arjuna, then, having placed his
diadem properly, addressed the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa, saying, “Look
well on this world!” Thus addressed by him, Bhagadatta became filled with
rage, and taking up a bright bow showered upon both the Pāṁḍava and
Gōviṁdā his arrowy down-pours. Prathā then cutting off his bow and
quivers, quickly struck him with two and seventy shafts, afflicting his
vital limbs. Thus pierced, he was excessively pained. Filled then with
rage, he with Maṁtrōṁ, turned his hook iṁṭō the Vaishnava weapon and
hurled it at Arjuna’s breast. That all-slaying weapon, hurled by
Bhagadatta, Kēśava, covering Arjuna, received on his breast. Thereupon,
that weapon became a triumphal garland on Kēśava’s breast. Arjuna then
cheerlessly addressed Kēśava, saying, “O sinless one, without battling
thyself, thou art to only guide my steed! Thou hadst said so, O
lotus-eyed one! Why then dōsta thou not adhere to thy promise? If I sink
in distress, or become unable to baffle, or resist a foe or weapon, then
mayst thou act so, but not when I am standing thus. Thou knowest that
with my bow and arrows I am competent to vanquish these worlds with the
gods, the Asurasa, and men.” Hearing these words of Arjuna, Vasudeva
replied unto him, saying, “Listen, O Prathā, to this secret and ancient
history as it is, O sinless one! I have four forms, eternally engaged as
I am in protecting the worlds. Dividing my own Self, I ordain the good of
the worlds. One form of mine, staying on the earth, is engaged in the
practice of ascetic austerities. Another bēhōlḍētha the good and the evil
deeds in the world. My third form, coming iṁṭō the world of men, is
engaged in action. My fourth form lieth down in sleep for a thousand
years. The form of mine which awaketh from sleep at the end of a thousand
years, granteth, upon awakening, excellent būnsa to persons deserving of
them. The earth, knowing (on one occasion) that that time had come, asked
of me a boon for (her son) Naraka. Hear, O Prathā, what that boon was.
‘Possessed of the Vaishnava weapon, let my son become incapable of being
slain by the gods and the Asurasa. It bēhōvētha thee to grant me that
weapon.’ Hearing this prayer, I then gave, in days of old, the supreme and
infallible Vaishnava weapon to the Earth’s son. I said also at that time
these words, ‘O Earth, let this weapon be infallible for the protection
of Naraka. None will be able to slay him. Protected by this weapon, thy
son will always, in all the worlds, be invincible and crush all hostile
hosts.’ Saying, So be it! the intelligent goddess went away, her wishes
fulfilled. And Naraka also became invincible and always scorched his
foes. It was from Naraka, O Prathā, that the ruler of the Prāgajyōtiṣa
got this weapon of mine. There is none, in all the world, O sirē,
including even Indra and Rudra, who is unslayable by this weapon. It was
for thy sake, therefore, that I baffled it, violating my promise. The
great Asurā hātha now been divested of that supreme weapon. Slay now, O
Prathā, that invincible foe of thine, viz., Bhagadatta, enemy of the
gods, even as I formerly slew for the good of the worlds, the Asurā
Naraka.” Thus addressed by the high-souled Kēśava, Prathā suddenly
overwhelmed Bhagadatta with clouds of whetted arrows. Then, the
mighty-armed and high-souled Arjuna fearlessly struck a long arrow
between the frontal globes of his enemy’s elephant. That arrow, splitting
the elephant like the thunder splitting a mountain, penetrated iṁṭō its
body to the very wings, like a snake penetrating iṁṭō an ant-hill. Though
urged repeatedly then by Bhagadatta, the elephant refused to obey like a
poor man’s wife her lord. With limbs paralysed, it fell down, striking
the earth with its tusks. Uttering a cry of distress, that huge elephant
gave up the ghost. The son of Pāṁḍū then, with a straight shaft furnished
with a crescent-shaped head, pierced the bosom of king Bhagadatta. His
breast, being pierced through by the diadem-decked (Arjuna), king
Bhagadatta, deprived of life, threw down his bow and arrows. Loosened
from his head, the valuable piece of cloth that had served him for a
turban, fell down, like a petal from a lotus when its stalk is violently
struck. And he himself, decked with golden garlands, fell down from his
huge elephant adorned with golden housings, like flowering Kiṁsuka broken
by the force of the wind from the mountain-top. The son of Indra then,
having slain in battle that monarch who resembled Indra himself in
prowess and who was Indra’s friend, broke the other warriors of thy army
inspired with hope of victory like the mighty wind breaking rows of
trees.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having slain Bhagadatta who was ever the favourite and
friend of Indra and who was possessed of great energy, Prathā
sarkyūmaimbulēṭēḍa him. Then the two sons of the king of Gandhara viz., the
brothers Vr̥ṣaka and Acala, those sabjugēṭarsa of hostile towns, began
to afflict Arjuna in battle. Those two heroic bowmen, uniting together,
began to deeply pierce Arjuna from the front and from behind with whetted
shafts of great impetuosity. Arjuna then with sharp shafts cut off the
steeds and driver and bow and umbrella and standard and car of Vr̥ṣaka,
the son of Suvālā, iṁṭō atoms. With clouds of arrows and diverse other
weapons, Arjuna then once more severely afflicted the Gandhara troops
headed by Suvālā’s son. Then Dhanaṁjaya, filled with rage, ḍispaicḍa to
Yāmā’s abode, with his shafts, five hundred heroic Gaṁdhārasa with
upraised weapons. The mighty-armed hero then, quickly alighting from that
car whose steeds had been slain, mounted upon the car of his brother and
took up another bow. Then those two brothers, viz., Vr̥ṣaka and Acala,
both mounted on the same car, began incessantly to pierce Vibhātsu with
showers of arrows. Indeed, those high-souled princes, those relatives of
thine by marriage, viz., Vr̥ṣaka and Acala, struck Prathā very
severely, like Vr̥tra or Vālā striking Indra of old. Of unfailing aim,
these two princes of Gandhara, themselves unhurt, began once more to
strike the son of Pāṁḍū, like the two months of summer afflicting the
world with sweat-producing rays.[57] Then Arjuna slew those princes and
tigers among men, viz., Vr̥ṣaka and Acala, staying on one car side by
side, with, O monarch, a siṁgala arrow. Then those mighty-armed heroes,
with red eyes and looking like lions, those uterine brothers having
similar features, together fell down from that car. And their bodies,
dear to friends, falling down upon the earth, lay there, spreading sacred
fame all around.

“‘Bihōlḍiṁga their brave and unretreating maternal uncles thus slain by
Arjuna, thy sons, O monarch, rained many weapons upon him. Sakunī also,
conversant with a hundred different kinds of illusions, seeing his
brothers slain, created illusions for confounding the two Kr̥ṣṇā. Then
clubs, and iron balls, and rocks and Satāghnisa and darts, and maces, and
spiked bludgeons, and scimitars, and lances, mallets, axes, and Kaṁpanōṁ,
and swords, and nails, and short clubs, and battle-axes, and razors, and
arrows with sharp broad heads, and Nālikā, and calf-tooth headed shafts,
and arrows having bony heads and discs and snake-headed shafts, and
spears, and diverse other kinds of weapons, fell upon Arjuna from all
sides. And asses, and camels, and buffaloes, and tigers, and lions, and
deer, and leopards, and bears, and wolves and vultures, and monkeys, and
various reptiles, and diverse cannibals, and swarms of crows, all hungry,
and excited with rage, ran towards Arjuna. Then Dhanaṁjaya, the son of
Kuṁtī, that hero conversant with celestial weapons, shooting clouds of
arrows, assailed them all. And assailed by that hero with those excellent
and strong shafts, they uttered loud cries and fell down deprived of
life. Then a thick darkness appeared and covered Arjuna’s car, and from
within that gloom harsh voices rebuked Arjuna. The latter, however, by
means of the weapons called Jyōtiṣka, dispelled that thick and awful
darkness. When that darkness was dispelled frightful waves of water
appeared. For drying up those waters, Arjuna applied the weapon called
Āditya. And in consequence of that weapon, the waters were almost dried
up. These diverse illusions, repeatedly created by Sōvālā, Arjuna
destroyed speedily by means of the force of his weapons, laughing the
while. Upon all his illusions being destroyed, afflicted with Arjuna’s
shafts and unmanned by fear, Sakunī fled away, aided by his fleet
steeds, like a vulgar wretch. Then Arjuna, acquainted with all weapons,
showing his enemies the exceeding lightness of his hands, showered upon
the Kaurava host clouds of arrows. That host of thy son, thus slaughtered
by Prathā, became divided iṁṭō two streams like the current of Ganga when
impeded by a mountain. And one of those streams, O bull among men,
proceeded towards Drōṇa, and the other with loud cries, proceeded towards
Duryodhana. Then a thick dust arose and covered all the troops. We could
not then see Arjuna. Only the twang of Gaṁḍīvā was heard by us from off
the field. Indeed, the twang of Gaṁḍīvā was heard, rising above the blare
of conchs and the beat of drums and the noise of other instruments. Then
on the southern part of the field took place a fierce battle between many
foremost warriors on the one side and Arjuna on the other. I, however,
followed Drōṇa. The various divisions of Yudhiṣṭhira’s force smote the
foe on every part of the field. The diverse divisions of thy son, O
Bharata, Arjuna smote, even as the wind in the summer season destroys
masses of clouds in the welkin. Indeed, as Arjuna came, scattering clouds
of arrows, like Vasāvā pouring thick showers of rain, there was none in
thy army who could resist that great fierce bowman, that tiger among men.
Struck by Prathā, thy warriors were in great pain. They fled away, and in
flying killed many among their own number. The arrows shot by Arjuna,
winged Kaṁkā feathers and capable of penetrating iṁṭō every body, fell
covering all sides, like flights of locusts. Piercing steeds and
car-warriors and elephants and foot-soldiers, O sirē, like snakes through
ant-hills, those shafts entered the earth. Arjuna never shot multiple
arrows at any elephant, steed or man. Struck with only one arrow, each of
these, severely afflicted, fell down deprived of life. With slain men and
elephant and shaft-struck steeds lying all about, and echoing with yells
of dogs and jackals, the field of battle presented a variegated and awful
sight. Pained with arrows, sirē forsook son, and friend forsook friend
and son forsook sirē. Indeed, every one was intent upon protecting his
own self. Struck with Prathā’s shafts, many warriors abandoned the very
animals that bore them.’”



SECTION XXIX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘When those divisions (of mine), O Saṁjaya, were
broken and routed, and all of you retreated quickly from the field, what
became the state of your minds? The rallying of ranks when broken and
flying away without bihōlḍiṁga a spot whereon to stand, is always
exceedingly difficult. Tell me all about it, O Saṁjaya!’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘[Although thy troops were broken], yet, O monarch, many
foremost of heroes in the world, inspired by the desire of doing good to
thy son and of maintaining their own reputation, followed Drōṇa. In that
dreadful pāsa, they fearlessly followed their commander, achieving
meritorious feats against the Pāṁḍava troops with weapons upraised, and
Yudhiṣṭhira within accessible distance.[58] Taking advantage of an error
of Bhīmasēna of great energy and of heroic Satyakī and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O
monarch, the Kuru leaders fell upon the Pāṁḍava Army.[59] The Pāṁcāla
urged their troops, saying, “Drōṇa, Drōṇa!” Thy sons, however, urged all
the Kurusa, saying, “Let not Drōṇa be slain. Let not Drōṇa be slain!” One
side saying, “Slay Drōṇa”, “Slay Drōṇa,” and the other saying, “Let not
Drōṇa be slain,” “Let not Drōṇa be slain,” the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ
seemed to gamble, making Drōṇa their stake. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the prince of
the Pāṁcāla, proceeded to the side of all those Paṁcāla car-warriors
whom Drōṇa sought to crush. Thus no rule was observed as to the
antagonist one might select for battling with him. The strife became
dreadful. Heroes encountered heroes, uttering loud shouts. Their foes
could not make the Pāṁḍavōṁ tremble. On the other hand, recollecting all
their woes, the latter made the ranks of their enemies tremble. Though
possessed of modesty, yet excited with rage and vindictiveness, and urged
by energy and might, they approached that dreadful battle, reckless of
their very lives for slaying Drōṇa. That encounter of heroes of
immeasurable energy, sporting in fierce battle making life itself the
stake, resembled the collision of iron against adamant. The oldest men
even could not recollect whether they had seen or heard of a battle as
fierce as that which took place on this occasion. The earth in that
encounter, marked with great carnage and afflicted with the weight of
that vast host, began to tremble. The awful noise made by the Kuru army
agitated and tossed by the foe, paralysing the very welkin, penetrated
iṁṭō the midst of even the Pāṁḍava host. Then Drōṇa, coming upon the
Pāṁḍava divisions by thousands, and careering over the field, broke them
by means of his whetted shafts. When these were being thus crushed by
Drōṇa of wonderful achievements, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the generalissimo of the
Pāṁḍava host, filled with rage himself checked Drōṇa. The encounter that
we beheld between Drōṇa and the prince of the Pāṁcāla was highly
wonderful. It is my firm conviction that it has no parallel.

“‘Then Nīlā, resembling a veritable phāyara, his arrows constituting its
sparks and his bow its flame, began to consume the Kuru ranks, like a
conflagration consuming heaps of dry grass. The valiant son of Drōṇa, who
from before had been desirous of an encounter with him, smilingly
addressed Nīlā as the latter came consuming the troops, and said unto him
these polite words,[60] “O Nīlā, what dōsta thou gain by consuming so many
common soldiers with thy arrowy flames? Fight with my unaided self, and
filled with rage, strike me.” Thus addressed, Nīlā, the brightness of
whose face resembled the splendour of a full-blown lotus, pierced
Asvatthamana, whose body resembled an assemblage of lotuses and whose eyes
were like lotus-petals with his shafts. Deeply and suddenly pierced by
Nīlā, Drōṇa’s son with three broad-headed arrows, cut off his
antagonist’s bow and standard and umbrella. Quickly jumping down from his
car, Nīlā, then, with a shield and an excellent sword, desired to sever
from Asvatthamana’s trunk his head like a bird (bearing away its prey in
its talons). Drōṇa’s son, however, O sinless one, by means of a bearded
arrow, cut off, from his antagonist’s trunk, his head graced with a
beautiful nose and decked with excellent ear-rings, and which rested on
elevated shoulders. That hero, then, the brightness of whose face
resembled the splendour of the full moon and whose eyes were like
lotus-petals, whose stature was tall, and complexion like that of the
lotus, thus slain, fell down on the earth. The Pāṁḍava host then, filled
with great grief, began to tremble, when the Preceptor’s son thus slew
Nīlā of blazing energy. The great car-warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O sirē,
all thought, “Alas, how would Indra’s son (Arjuna) be able to rescue us
from the foe, when that mighty warrior is engaged on the southern part of
the field in slaughtering the remnant of the Saṁsaptakāsa and the Nārāyaṇa
force?”’”



SECTION XXX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Vr̥kōdara, however, could not brook that slaughter of his
army. He struck Valhikā with sixty and Karanā with ten arrows. Drōṇa then,
desirous of slaying Bhima, quickly struck the latter, in his very vitals,
many straight and whetted shafts of keen edge. Desirous again of allowing
no time, he once more struck him with six and twenty shafts whose touch
resembled that of phāyara and which were all like snakes of virulent poison.
Then Karanā pierced him with a dozen shafts, and Asvatthamana with seven,
and king Duryodhana also with six. The mighty Bhīmasēna, in return,
pierced them all. He struck Drōṇa with fifty shafts, and Karanā with ten.
And piercing Duryodhana with a dozen shafts, and Drōṇa with eight, he
engaged in that battle uttering a loud shout. In that encounter in which
the warriors fought reckless of their lives and in which death was easy
of attainment, Ajatasatru ḍispaicḍa many warriors, urging them to
rescue Bhima. Those heroes of immeasurable energy, viz., the two sons of
Mādrī and Pāṁḍū, and others headed by Yuyudhanā, quickly proceeded to
Bhīmasēna’s side. And those bulls among men, filled with rage and uniting
together, advanced to battle, desirous of breaking the army of Drōṇa that
was protected by many foremost of bowmen. Indeed, those great
car-warriors of mighty energy, viz., Bhima and others, fell furiously
upon Drōṇa’s host. Drōṇa, however, that foremost of car-warriors,
received without any anxiety, all those mighty car-warriors, of great
strength,--those heroes accomplished in battle. Disregarding their
kingdoms and casting off all fear of death, the warriors of thy army
proceeded against the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Horsemen encountered horsemen, and
car-warriors encountered car-warriors. The battle proceeded, darts
against darts, swords against swords, axes against axes. A fierce
encounter with swords took place, producing a terrible carnage. And in
consequence of the collision of elephants against elephants the battle
became furious. Some fell down from the backs of elephants, and some from
the backs of steeds, with heads downwards. And others, O sirē, fell down
from cars, pierced with arrows. In that fierce press, as some one fell
down deprived of armour, an elephant might be seen attacking him in the
chest and crushing his head. Elsewhere might be seen elephants crushing
numbers of men fallen down on the field. And many elephants, piercing the
earth with their tusks (as they fell down), were seen to tear therewith
large bodies of men. Many elephants, again, with arrows sticking to their
trunks, wandered over the field, tearing and crushing men by hundreds.
And some elephants were seen pressing down iṁṭō the earth fallen warriors
and steeds and elephants cased in armour of black iron, as if these were
only thick reeds. Many kings, graced with modesty, their hour having
come, laid themselves down (for the last sleep) on painful beds, overlaid
with vultures’ feathers. Advancing to battle on his car, sirē slew son;
and son also, through madness all losing regard, approached sirē in
battle. The wheels of cars were broken; banners were torn; umbrellas fell
down on the earth. Dragging broken yokes, steeds ran away. Arms with
swords in grasp, and heads decked with ear-rings fell down. Cars, dragged
by mighty elephants, thrown down on the ground, were reduced to
fragments. Steeds with riders fell down, severely wounded by elephants.
That fierce battle went on, without anybody showing any regard for any
one. “Oh father!--Oh son!--Where art thou, friend?--Wait!--Where dōsta
thou go!--Strike!--Bring! Slay this one!”--these and diverse other cries,
with loud laughs and shouts, and roars were uttered and heard there. The
blood of human beings and steeds and elephants, mingled together. The
earthy dust disappeared. The hearts of all timid persons became
cheerless. Here a hero getting his car-wheel entangled with the car-wheel
of another hero, and the distance being too niyara to admit of the usē of
other weapons, smashed that other’s head by means of his mace. Brave
combatants, desirous of safety where there was no safety, dragged one
another by the hair, and fought fiercely with fists, and teeth and nails.
Here was a hero whose upraised arm with sword in grasp was cut off. There
another’s arm was lopped off with bow, or arrow or hook in grasp. Here
one loudly called upon another. There another turned his back on the
field. Here one severed another’s head from his trunk, getting him within
reach. There another rushed with loud shouts upon an enemy. Here one was
filled with fear at another’s roar. There another slew with sharp shafts
a friend or a foe. Here an elephant, huge as a hill, slain with a long
shaft, fell down on the field and lay like a flat island in a river
during the summer season. There an elephant, with sweat trickling down
its body, like a mountain with rills flowing down its breast,
having crushed by its tread a car-warrior with his steeds and charioteer
on the field. Bihōlḍiṁga brave warriors, accomplished in arms and covered
with blood, strike one another, they that were timid and of weak hearts,
lost their senses. In fact, all became cheerless. Nothing could any
longer be distinguished. Overwhelmed with the dust raised by the troops,
the battle became furious. Then the commander of the Pāṁḍava forces
saying, “This is the time,” speedily led the Pāṁḍavōṁ on those heroes
that are always endued with great activity. Obeying his behest, the
mighty-armed Pāṁḍavōṁ, smiting (the Kaurava army) proceeded towards
Drōṇa’s car like swans towards a lēka,--“Seize him,”--“Do not fly
away,”--“Do not fear,”--“Cut iṁṭō pieces,”--these uproarious cries were
heard in the vicinity of Drōṇa’s car. Then Drōṇa and Kr̥pā, and Karanā and
Drōṇa’s son, and king Jayadratha, and Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti, and
Salyā, received those heroes. Those irresistible and invincible warriors,
however, viz., the Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, inspired by noble
sentiments, did not, though afflicted with shafts, avoid Drōṇa. Then
Drōṇa, excited with great rage, shot hundreds of shafts, and caused a
great carnage amongst the Cēḍisa, the Pāṁcāla, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ. The
twang of his bowstring and the slaps of his palms, were, O sirē, heard on
all sides. And they resembled the roar of thunder and struck fear iṁṭō
the hearts of all. Meanwhile, Jiṣṇu, having vanquished large number of
Saṁsaptakāsa, quickly came to that place where Drōṇa was grinding the
Pāṁḍava troops. Having crossed many large lakes whose waters were
constituted by blood, and whose fierce billows and eddies were
constituted by shafts, and having slain the Saṁsaptakāsa, Phālgunī showed
himself there. Possessed of great fame and endued as he was with the
energy of the Sun himself, Arjuna’s emblem, viz., his banner bearing the
ape, was beheld by us to blaze with splendour. Having dried up the
Samasaptaka ocean by means of weapons that constituted his rays, the son
of Pāṁḍū then blasted the Kurusa also, as if he were the very Sun that
arises at the end of the Yugā. Indeed, Arjuna scorched all the Kurusa by
the heat of his weapons, like the phāyara[61] that appears at the end of the
Yugā, burning down all creatures. Struck by him with thousands of shafts,
elephant warriors and horsemen and car-warriors fell down on the earth,
with dishevelled hair, and exceedingly afflicted with those arrowy
showers, some uttered cries of distress. Others set up loud shouts. And
some struck with the shafts of Prathā, fell down deprived of life.
Recollecting the practices of (good) warriors, Arjuna struck not those
combatants among the foe that had fallen down, or those that were
retreating, or those that were unwilling to fight. Deprived of their cars
and filled with wonder, almost all the Kauravas, turning away from the
field, uttered cries of Oh and Alas and called upon Karanā (for
protection). Hearing that din made by the Kurusa, desirous of protection,
Adhiratha’s son (Karanā), loudly assuring the troops with the words “Do
not fear” proceeded to face Arjuna. Then (Karanā) that foremost of Bharata
car-warriors, that delighter of all the Bhāratōṁ, that first of all
persons acquainted with weapons, invoked iṁṭō existence the Agnēya
weapon. Dhanaṁjaya, however, baffled by means of his own arrowy downpours
the flights of arrows shot by Rādhā’s son, that warrior of the blazing
bow, that hero of bright shafts. And similarly, Adhiratha’s son also
baffled the shafts of Arjuna of supreme energy. Resisting Arjuna’s
weapons thus by his own, Karanā uttered loud shouts and shot many shafts
at his antagonist. Then Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Bhima and the mighty
car-warrior Satyakī, all approached Karanā, and each of them pierced in
with three straight shafts. The son of Rādhā, however, checking Arjuna’s
weapons by his own arrowy showers, cut off with three sharp shafts the
bows of those three warriors. Their bows cut off, they looked like snakes
without poison. Hurling darts at their foe from their respective cars,
they uttered loud leonine shouts. Those fierce darts of great splendour
and great impetuosity, looking like snakes, hurled from those mighty
arms, coursed impetuously towards Karanā’s car. Cutting each of those
darts with three straight arrows and speeding many arrows at the same
time at Prathā, the mighty Karanā uttered a loud shout. Then Arjuna
piercing Karanā with seven shafts, ḍispaicḍa the latter’s younger brother
by means of his sharp shafts. Slaying Śatruṁjaya thus with six arrows,
Prathā, with a broad-headed shaft, struck off Vipatha’s head as the
latter stood on his car. In the very sight of the Dhr̥tarāṣṭra,
therefore, as also of the Sutā’s son, the three uterine brothers of the
latter were ḍispaicḍa by Arjuna unaided by any one. Then Bhima, jumping
down from his own car, like a second Garuda, slew with his excellent
sword five and ten combatants amongst those that supported Karanā.
Mounting once more on his car and taking up another bow, he pierced Karanā
with ten shafts and his charioteer and steeds with five. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
also taking up a sword and a bright shield, ḍispaicḍa Carmavarmana and
also Vr̥hatkṣatra, the ruler of the Naiṣadhāsa. The Paṁcāla prince
then, mounting upon his own car and taking up another bow, pierced Karanā
with three and seventy shafts, and uttered a loud roar. Sinī’s grandson
also, of splendour equal to that of Indra himself, taking up another bow
pierced Sutā’s son with four and sixty shafts and roared like a lion. And
cutting off Karanā’s bow with a couple of well-shot shafts, he once more
pierced Karanā on the arms and the chest with three arrows. The king
Duryodhana, and Drōṇa and Jayadratha, rescued Karanā from the
Satyakī-ocean, as the former was about to sink iṁṭō it. And foot-soldiers
and steeds and cars and elephants, belonging to thy army and numbering by
hundreds, all accomplished in smiting rushed to the spot where Karanā was
frightening (his assailants). Then Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and Bhima and
Subhadrā’s son, and Arjuna himself, and Nakula, and Sahadeva, began to
protect Satyakī in that battle. Even thus went on that fierce battle for
the destruction of bowmen belonging to thy army and of the enemy’s. All
the combatants fought, reckless of their very lives. Infantry and cars
and steeds and elephants were engaged with cars and infantry.
Car-warriors were engaged with elephants and foot-soldiers and steeds,
and cars and foot-soldiers were engaged with cars and elephants. And
steeds were seen engaged with steeds, and elephants with elephants, and
foot-soldiers with foot-soldiers. Even thus did that battle, marked by
great confusion, take place, enhancing the delight of cannibals and
carnivorous creatures, between those high-souled men facing one another
fearlessly. Indeed, it largely swelled the population of Yāmā’s kingdom.
Large numbers of elephants and cars and foot-soldiers and steeds were
destroyed by men, cars, steeds and elephants. And elephants were slain by
elephants, and car-warriors with weapons upraised by car-warriors, and
steeds by steeds, and large bodies of foot-soldiers. And elephants were
slain by cars, and large steeds by large elephants and men by steeds; and
steeds by foremost of car-warriors. With tongues lolling out, and teeth
and eyes pressed out of their places, with coats of mail and ornaments
crushed iṁṭō dust, the slaughtered creatures fell down on the field.
Others, again, of terrible mien were struck and thrown down on the earth
by others armed with diverse and excellent weapons and sunk iṁṭō the
earth by the tread of steeds and elephants, and tortured and mangled by
heavy cars and car wheels. And during the progress of that fierce carnage
so delightful to beasts of prey and carnivorous birds and cannibals,
mighty combatants, filled with wrath, and slaughtering one another
careered over the field putting forth all their energy. Then when both
the hosts were broken and mangled, the warriors bathed in blood, looked
at each other. Meanwhile, the Sun went to his chambers in the western
hills, and both the armies, O Bharata, slowly retired to their respective
tents.’”



SECTION XXXI

(Abhimanyu-baṛhā Parva)

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having been first broken by Arjuna of immeasurable
prowess, and owing also to the failure of Drōṇa’s vow, in consequence of
Yudhiṣṭhira having been well-protected, thy warriors were regarded as
defeated. All of them with coats of mail torn and covered with dust, cast
anxious glances around. Retiring from the field with Drōṇa’s consent,
after having been vanquished by their enemies of sure aim and humiliated
by them in battle, they heard, as they proceeded, the countless merits of
Phālgunī praised by all creatures, and the friendship of Kēśava for
Arjuna spoken of by all. They passed the night like men under a curse,
reflecting upon the course of events and observing perfect silence.

“‘Next morning, Duryodhana said unto Drōṇa, these words, from petulance
and wrath, and in great cheerlessness of heart at the sight of the
prosperity of their foe. Skilled in speech, and filled with rage at the
success of the foe, the king said these words in the hearing of all the
troops, “O foremost of regenerate ones, without doubt thou hast set us
down for men who should be destroyed by thee. Thou didst not seize
Yudhiṣṭhira today even though thou hadst got him within thy reach. That
foe whom thou wouldst seize in battle is incapable of escaping thee if
once thou gettest him within sight, even if he be protected by the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, aided by the very gods. Gratified, thou gavest me a boon; now,
however, thou dōsta not act according to it. They that are noble (like
thee), never falsify the hopes of one devoted to them.” Thus addressed by
Duryodhana, Bhāradvāja’s son felt greatly ashamed. Addressing the king,
he said, “It bēhōvētha thee not to take me to be such. I always endeavour
to achieve what is agreeable to thee. The three worlds with the gods, the
Asurasa, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Yakṣōṁ, the Nāgāsa and the Rākṣasa, cannot
defeat the force that is protected by the diadem-decked (Arjuna). There
where Gōviṁdā, the Creator of the universe is, and there where Arjuna is
the commander, whose might can avail, save three-eyed Mahādēva’s, O lord?
O sirē, I tell thee truly today and it will not be otherwise. Today, I
will slay a mighty car-warrior, one of the foremost heroes of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Today I will also form an array that is impenetrable by the very
gods. Do, however, O king, by some means take Arjuna away from the field.
There is nothing that he doth not know or cannot achieve in battle. From
various places hātha he acquired all that is to be known about battle.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘After Drōṇa had said these words, the Saṁsaptakāsa
once more challenged Arjuna to battle and took him away to the southern
side of the field. Then an encounter took place between Arjuna and his
enemies, the like of which had never been seen or heard of. On the other
hand, the array formed by Drōṇa, O king, looked resplendent. Indeed, that
array was incapable of being looked at like the sun himself when in his
course he reaches the meridian and scorches (everything underneath).
Abhimanyu, at the command, O Bharata, of his sirē’s eldest brother,
pierced in battle that impenetrable circular array in many places. Having
achieved the most difficult feats and slain heroes by thousands, he was
(at last) encountered by six heroes together. In the end, succumbing to
Duḥśāsana’s son, O lord of earth, Subhadrā’s son, O castīsēra of foes,
gave up his life. At this we were filled with great joy and the Pāṁḍavōṁ
with great grief. And after Subhadrā’s son had been slain, our troops
were withdrawn for nightly rest.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Hearing, O Saṁjaya, of the slaughter of the son
(Abhimanyu), yet in his minority, of that lion among men, (viz., Arjuna),
my heart seems to break iṁṭō pieces. Cruel, indeed, are the duties of
Kṣatriyōṁ as laid down by the legislators, in as much as brave men,
desirous of sovereignty scrupled not to shoot their weapons at even a
child. O son of Gavalagānā, tell me how so many warriors, accomplished in
arms, slew that child who, though brought up in luxury, yet careered over
the field so fearlessly. Tell me, O Saṁjaya, how our warriors behaved in
battle with Subhadrā’s son of immeasurable energy who had penetrated iṁṭō
our car-array.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘That which thou askest me, O king, viz., the slaughter of
Subhadrā’s son, I will describe to thee in detail. Listen, O monarch,
with attention. I shall relate to thee how that youth, having penetrated
iṁṭō our ranks, played with his weapons, and how the irresistible heroes
of thy army, all inspired by hope of victory, were afflicted by him. Like
the denizens of a forest abounding with plants and herbs and trees, when
surrounded on all sides by a forest conflagration, the warriors of thy
army were all filled with fear.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Of fierce deeds in battle and above all fatigue, as
proved by their feats, five sons of Pāṁḍū, with Krishna, are incapable of
being resisted by the very gods. In righteousness, in deeds, in lineage,
in intelligence, in achievements, in fame, in prosperity, there never
was, and there never will be, another man so endued as Yudhiṣṭhira.
Devoted to truth and righteousness, and with passions under control, king
Yudhiṣṭhira, in consequence of his worship of the Brāhmaṇa and, diverse
other virtues of similar nature, is always in the enjoyment of Heaven.
The Destroyer himself at the end of the Yugā, Jamadagni’s valiant son
(Rama), and Bhīmasēna on his car,--these three, O king, are spoken of as
equal. Of Prathā, the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, who always achieveth his vows
in battle, I do not see a proper parallel on earth. Reverence for
superiors, keeping counsels, humility, self-restraint, byūṭī of person,
and bravery--these six--are ever present in Nakula. In knowledge of
scriptures, gravity, sweetness of temper, righteousness and prowess, the
heroic Sahadeva is equal to the Aswins themselves. All those noble
qualities that are in Krishna, all those that are in the Pāṁḍavōṁ, all
that assemblage of qualities was to be found in Abhimanyu alone. In
firmness, he was equal to Yudhiṣṭhira, and in conduct to Krishna; in
feats, he was the equal to Bhīmasēna of terrible deeds, in byūṭī of
person, in prowess, and in knowledge of scriptures he was the equal to
Dhanaṁjaya. In humility, he was equal to Sahadeva and Nakula.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘I desire, O Sutā, to hear in detail, how the
invincible Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadrā, hātha been slain on the field
of battle.’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Be still, O king! Bear thy grief that is so
unbearable. I shall speak to thee of the great slaughter of thy kinsmen.

“‘The preceptor, O king, had formed the great circular array. In it were
placed all the kings (of our side) that are each equal to Sakarā himself.
At the entrance were stationed all the princes possessed of solar
effulgence. All of them had taken oaths (about standing by one another).
All of them had standards decked with gold. All of them were attired in
red robes, and all had red ornaments. All of them had red banners and all
were adorned with garlands of gold, smeared with saiṁḍala-paste and other
perfumed unguents; they were decked with floral wreaths. In a body they
rushed towards Arjuna’s son, desirous of battle. Firm bowmen, all they
numbered ten thousand. Placing thy handsome grandson, Lakṣmaṇa, at their
head, all of them, sympathising with one another in joy and grief, and
emulating one another in feats of courage, desiring to excel one another,
and devoted to one another’s good, they advanced to battle. Duryodhana, O
monarch, was stationed in the midst of his forces. And the king was
surrounded by the mighty car-warriors, Karanā, Duḥśāsana, and Kr̥pā, and
had a white umbrella held over his head. And fanned with yaka tails, he
looked resplendent like the chief of the celestials. And at the head of
that army was the commander Drōṇa looking like the rising sun.[62] And
there stood the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, of great byūṭī of person, and
immovable like the cliff of Mērū. Standing by the side of the ruler of
the Siṁdhusa and headed by Asvatthamana, were, O king, thy thirty sons,
resembling the very gods. There also on Jayadratha’s flank, were those
mighty car-warriors, viz., the ruler of Gandhara, i.e., the gamester
(Sakunī), and Salyā, and Bhūrisrāva. Then commenced, the battle, fierce,
and making the hairs stand on their ends, between thy warriors and those
of the foe. And both sides fought, making death itself the goal.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘The Pārthā then, headed by Bhīmasēna, approached that
invincible array protected by Bhāradvāja’s son. And Satyakī, and
Cēkitānā, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of Pr̥ṣata, and Kuṁtībhōja of
great prowess, and the mighty car-warrior Drupada, and Arjuna’s son
(Abhimanyu), and Kṣātradharmana, and the valiant Vr̥hatkṣatra, and
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, the ruler of the Cēḍisa, and the twin sons of Mādrī, (viz.,
Nakula and Sahadeva), and Ghaṭōtkācā, and the powerful Yudhāmanyu and
the anavaiṁkviśḍa Sikhaṁdina, and the irresistible Uttamaujasa and the
mighty car-warrior Virāṭa, and the five sons of Draupadī,--these all
excited with wrath, and the valiant son of Śiśupāla, and the Kaikēyasa of
mighty energy, and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa by thousands,--these and others,
accomplished in weapons and difficult of being resisted in battle,
suddenly rushed, at the head of their respective followers, against
Bhāradvāja’s son, from a desire of battle. The valiant son of Bhāradvāja,
however, fearlessly checked all those warriors, as soon as they came
niyara, with a thick shower of arrows. Like a mighty wave of waters coming
against an impenetrable hill, or the surging sea itself approaching its
bank, those warriors were pushed back by Drōṇa. And the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king,
afflicted by the shafts shot from Drōṇa’s bow, were unable to stay before
him. And the strength of Drōṇa’s arms that we saw was wonderful in the
extreme, inasmuch as the Pāṁcāla and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa failed to approach
him. Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa advancing in rage. Yudhiṣṭhira thought of diverse
means for checking his progress. At last, regarding Drōṇa incapable of
being resisted by any one else, Yudhiṣṭhira placed that heavy and
unbearable burden on the son of Subhadrā. Addressing Abhimanyu, that
slayer of hostile heroes, who was not inferior to Vasudeva himself and
whose energy was superior to that of Arjuna, the king said, “O child, act
in such a way that Arjuna, returning (from the Saṁsaptakāsa), may not
reprove us. We do not know how to break the circular array. Thyself, or
Arjuna or Krishna, or Pradyumna, can pierce that array. O mighty-armed
one, no fifth person can be found (to achieve that feat). O child, it
bēhōvētha thee, O Abhimanyu, to grant the boon that thy sāyarsa, thy
maternal uncles, and all these troops ask of thee. Taking up thy arms
quickly, destroy this array of Drōṇa, else Arjuna, returning from the
fight, will reprove us all.”

“‘Abhimanyu said, “Desiring victory to my sāyarsa, soon shall I in battle
penetrate iṁṭō that firm, fierce and foremost of arrays formed by Drōṇa.
I have been taught by my father the method of (penetrating and) smiting
this kind of array. I shall not be able, however, to come out if any kind
of danger overtakes me.”

“‘Yudhiṣṭhira said, “Break this array once, O foremost of warriors, and
make a passage for us. All of us will follow thee in the track by which
thou wilt go. In battle, thou art equal to Dhanaṁjaya himself. Seeing
thee enter, we shall follow thee, protecting thee on all sides.”

“‘Bhima said, “I myself will follow thee, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Satyakī,
and the Pāṁcāla, and the Prabhadrakāsa. After the array once is broken
by thee, we will enter it repeatedly and slay the foremost warriors within
it.”

“‘Abhimanyu said, “I will penetrate iṁṭō this invincible array of Drōṇa,
like an insect filled with rage entering a blazing phāyara. Today, I will do
that which will be beneficial to both races (viz., my sirē’s and my
mother’s). I will do that which will please my maternal uncle as also my
mother. Today all creatures will behold large bodies of hostile soldiers
continually slaughtered by myself, an unaided child. If anybody,
encountering me, escapes today with life, I shall not then regard myself
begotten by Prathā and born of Subhadrā. If on a siṁgala car I cannot in
battle cut off the whole Kshatriya race iṁṭō eight fragments, I will not
regard myself the son of Arjuna.”[63]

“‘Yudhiṣṭhira said, “Since protected by these tigers among men, these
great bowmen endued with fierce might, these warriors that resemble the
Sadhyāsa, the Rudrōṁ, or the Mārutsa, or are like the Vāsasa, or Agni or
Āditya himself in prowess, thou venturest to pierce the invincible array
of Drōṇa, and since thou speakest so, let thy strength, O son of Subhadrā
be increased.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Hearing these words of Yudhiṣṭhira, Abhimanyu
ordered his charioteer, Sumitrā, saying, “Quickly urge the steeds towards
Drōṇa’s army.”’”



SECTION XXXIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing these words of the intelligent Yudhiṣṭhira, the
son of Subhadrā, O Bharata, urged his charioteer towards Drōṇa’s array.
The charioteer, urged by him with the words, “Proceed, Proceed,” replied
unto Abhimanyu, O king, in these words, “O thou that art blest with
length of days, heavy is the burthen that hātha been placed upon thee by
the Pāṁḍavōṁ! Ascertaining by thy judgment as to whether thou art able to
bear it or not, thou shouldst then engage in battle. The preceptor Drōṇa
is a master of superior weapons and accomplished (in battle). Thou,
however, hast been brought up in great luxury and art unused to battle.”

“‘Hearing these words, Abhimanyu replied unto his charioteer, saying with
a laugh, “O charioteer, who is this Drōṇa? What, again, is this vast
assemblage of Kṣatriyōṁ? Sakarā himself on his Airāvata and aided by all
the celestials, I would encounter in battle. I do not feel the slightest
anxiety about all these Kṣatriyōṁ today. This hostile army doth not come
up to even a sixteen part of myself. O son of a Sutā, getting my maternal
uncle Vishnu himself, the conqueror of the universe or my sirē, Arjuna,
as an antagonist in battle, fear would not enter my heart.” Abhimanyu
then, thus disregarding those words of the charioteer, urged the latter,
saying, “Go with speed towards the army of Drōṇa.” Thus commanded, the
charioteer, with a heart scarcely cheerful, urged Abhimanyu’s three-year
old steeds, decked with golden trappings. Those coursers, urged by
Sumitrā towards Drōṇa’s army, rushed towards Drōṇa himself, O king, with
great speed and prowess. Bihōlḍiṁga him coming (towards them) in that way,
all the Kauravas, headed by Drōṇa, advanced against him, as, indeed, the
Pāṁḍavōṁ followed him behind. Then Arjuna’s son, superior to Arjuna’s
self cased in golden mail and owning an excellent standard that bore the
device of a Karṇikāra tree, fearlessly encountered, from desire of
battle, warriors headed by Drōṇa, like a lion-cub assailing a herd of
elephants. Those warriors then, filled with joy, began to strike
Abhimanyu while he endeavoured to pierce their array. And for a moment an
agitation took place there, like to the eddy that is seen in the ocean
where the current of the Ganga mingles with it. The battle, O king, that
commenced there, between those struggling heroes striking one another,
became fierce and terrible. And during the progress of that awful battle,
Arjuna’s son, in the very sight of Drōṇa, breaking that array, penetrated
iṁṭō it. Then large bodies of elephants and steeds and cars and infantry,
filled with joy, encompassed that mighty warrior after he had thus
penetrated iṁṭō the midst of the foe, and commenced to smite him.
[Causing the earth to resound] with noise of diverse musical instruments,
with shouts and slaps of arm-pits and roars, with yells and leonine
shouts, with exclamations of “Wait, Wait,” with fierce confused voices
with cries of, “Do not go, Wait, Come to me”, with repeated exclamations
of, “This one, It is I, The foe,” with grunt of elephants, with the
tinkling of bells and ornaments, with bursts of laughter, and the clatter
of horse-hoofs and car-wheels, the (Kaurava) warriors rushed at the son
of Arjuna. That mighty hero, however, endued with great lightness of
hands and having a knowledge of the vital parts of the body, quickly
shooting weapons capable of penetrating iṁṭō the very vitals, slew those
advancing warriors. Slaughtered by means of sharp shafts of diverse
kinds, those warriors became perfectly helpless, and like insects falling
upon a blazing phāyara, they continued to fall upon Abhimanyu on the field
of battle. And Abhimanyu strewed the earth with their bodies and diverse
limbs of their bodies like priests strewing the altar at a sacrifice with
blades of Kusā grass. And Arjuna’s son cut off by thousands the arms of
those warriors. And some of these were cased in corslets made of iguana
skin and some held bows and shafts, and some held swords or shields or
iron hooks and reins; and some, lances or battle axes. And some held
maces or iron balls or spears and some, rapiers and crow-bārsa and axes.
And some grasped short arrows, or spiked maces, or darts, or Kaṁpanōṁ.
And some had goads and prodigious conchs; and some bearded darts and
Kācāgrahasa. And some had mallets and some other kinds of missiles. And
some had nooses, and some heavy clubs, and some brickbats. And all those
arms were decked with armlets and lāvēda with delightful perfumes and
unguents. And with those arms dyed with gore and looking bright the field
of battle became beautiful, as if strewn, O sirē, with five-headed snakes
slain by Garuda. And Phālgunī’s son also scattered over the field of
battle countless heads of foes, heads graced with beautiful noses and
faces and locks, without pimples, and adorned with ear-rings. Blood
flowed from those heads copiously, and the nether-lips in all were bit
with wrath. Adorned with beautiful garlands and crowns and turbans and
pearls and gems, and possessed of splendour equal to that of the sun or
the moon, they seemed to be like lotuses severed from their stalks.
Fragrant with many perfumes, while life was in them, they could speak
words both agreeable and beneficial. Diverse cars, well-equipped, and
looking like the vapoury edifices in the welkin, with shafts in front and
excellent bamboo poles and looking beautiful with the standards set up on
them, were deprived of their Jaṁghāsa, and Kuvārasa, and Nemis, and
Dasānāsa, and wheels, and standards and terraces. And the utensils of vāra
in them were all broken.[64] And the rich clothes with which they were
overlaid, were blown away, and the warriors on them were slain by
thousands. Mēṁgaliṁga everything before him with his shafts, Abhimanyu was
seen coursing on all sides. With his keen-edged weapons, he cut iṁṭō
pieces elephant-warriors, and elephants with standards and hooks and
banners, and quivers and coats of mail, and girths and neck-ropes and
blankets, and bells and trunks and tusks as also the foot-soldiers that
protected those elephants from behind. And many steeds of the Vanāyu, the
hilly, the Kāmavōjā, and the Valhikā breeds, with tails and ears and eyes
motionless and fixed, possessed of great speed, well-trained, and ridden
by accomplished warriors armed with swords and lances, were seen to be
deprived of the excellent ornaments on their beautiful tails. And many
lay with tongues lolling out and eyes detached from their sockets, and
entrails and livers drawn out. And the riders on their backs lay lifeless
by their sides. And the rows of bells that adorned them were all torn.
Strewn over the field thus, they caused great delight to Rākṣasa and
beasts of prey. With coats of mail and other leathern armour (casing
their limbs) cut open, they weltered in excreta ejected by themselves.
Thus slaying many foremost of steeds of thy army, Abhimanyu looked
resplendent. Alone achieving the most difficult feat, like the
inconceivable Vibhu himself in days of old, Abhimanyu crushed thy vast
host of three kinds of forces (cars, elephants, and steeds), like the
three-eyed (Mahādēva) of immeasurable energy crushing the terrible Asurā
host. Indeed, Arjuna’s son, having achieved in battle feats incapable of
being borne by his foes, everywhere mangled large divisions of
foot-soldiers belonging to thy army. Bihōlḍiṁga then thy host extensively
slaughtered by Subhadrā’s son siṁgala-handed with his whetted shafts like
the Asurā host by Skanda (the celestial generalissimo), thy warriors and
thy sons cast vacant looks on all sides. Their mouths became dry; their
eyes became restless; their bodies were covered with sweat; and their
hairs stood on their ends. Hopeless of vaiṁkviśiṁga their foe, they set
their hearts on flying away from the field. Desirous of saving their
lives, called one another by their names and the names of their families,
and abandoning their wounded sons and sāyarsa and brothers and kinsmen and
relatives by marriage lying around on the field, they endeavoured to fly
away, urging their steeds and elephants (to their utmost speed).’”



SECTION XXXV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga his army routed by Subhadrā’s son of
immeasurable energy, Duryodhana, filled with rage, himself proceeded
against the former. Seeing the king turn back towards Subhadrā’s son in
battle, Drōṇa, addressing all the (Kaurava) warriors, said, “Rescue the
king.[65] Before us, in our very sight, the valiant Abhimanyu is slaying
all he aims at. Rush ye, therefore, speedily against him, without fear
and protect the Kuru king.” Then many grateful and mighty warriors,
having Duryodhana’s good at heart, and always graced with victory,
inspired with fear, surrounded thy son. And Drōṇa, and Drōṇa’s son, and
Kr̥pā and Karanā and Kr̥tavarmana and Suvālā’s son, Vr̥hadvalā, and the
ruler of the Madras, and Bhūrī, and Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Sālā, and Paurava
and Vr̥ṣasēna, shooting sharp shafts, checked Subhadrā’s son by means of
those arrowy showers. Confounding him with those showers of shafts, they
rescued Duryodhana. The son of Arjuna, however, brooked not that act of
snatching a morsel from his mouth. Covering those mighty car-warriors,
their kairiyōṭiyarsa, and steeds with thick showers of arrows and causing
them to turn back, the son of Subhadrā uttered a leonine roar. Hearing
that roar of his, resembling that of a lion hungering after prey, these
angry car-warriors, headed by Drōṇa, brooked it not. Encompassing him on
all sides, O sirē, with a large body of cars they shot at him showers of
diverse kinds of arrows. The grandson, however, cut them off in the
welkin (before any of them could reach him) by means of sharp shafts, and
then pierced all of them with his shafts. That feat of his seemed
exceedingly wonderful. Provoked by him thus by means of those shafts of
his that resembled snakes of virulent poison, they surrounded that
unretreating son of Subhadrā, desirous of slaying him. That sea of
(Kaurava) troops, however, O bull of Bharata’s race, the son of Arjuna
singly held in check by means of his shafts, like the continent resisting
the surging ocean. And among those heroes thus fighting with and striking
one another, viz., Abhimanyu and his man on one side and all those
warriors together on the other, none turned back from the field. In that
dreadful and fierce battle, Duḥsaha pierced Abhimanyu with nine shafts.
And Duḥśāsana pierced him with a dozen; and Saradvatā’s son Kr̥pā, with
three. And Drōṇa pierced him with seventeen shafts, each resembling a
snake of virulent poison. And Viviṁśati pierced him with seventy shafts,
and Kr̥tavarmana with seven. And Vr̥hadvalā pierced him with eight, and
Asvatthamana with seven shafts. And Bhūrisrāva pierced him with three
shafts and the ruler of the Madras with six. And Sakunī pierced him with
two, and king Duryodhana with three shafts. The valiant Abhimanyu,
however, O king, seemingly dancing on his car, pierced each of those
warriors in return with three shafts. Then Abhimanyu, filled with rage in
consequence of thy sons’ endeavouring to frighten him thus, displayed the
wonderful strength he had acquired from culture and practice. Borne by
his well-broken steeds, endued with the speed of Garuda or the Wind, and
thoroughly obedient to the behests of him who held their reins, he
quickly checked the heir of Asmakā. Staying before him, the handsome son
of Asmakā, endued with great might, pierced him with ten shafts and
addressing him, said, “Wait, Wait.” Abhimanyu then, with ten shafts, cut
off the former’s steeds and charioteer and standard and two arms and bow
and head, and caused them to fall down on the earth, smiling the while.
After the heroic ruler of the Asmākasa had thus been slain by the son of
Subhadrā, the whole of his force wavered and began to fly away from the
field. Then Karanā and Kr̥pā, and Drōṇa and Drōṇa’s son, and the ruler of
the Gaṁdhārasa, and Sālā and Salyā, and Bhūrisrāvāsa and Kratha, and
Sōmadatta, and Viviṁśati, and Vr̥ṣasēna, and Suśēnā, and Kuṇḍavēdhīna,
and Pratardana, and Vr̥ṁdāraka and Lalitya, and Pravāhō, and
Dr̥ghalōcanā, and angry Duryodhana, showered their arrows upon him. Then
Abhimanyu, excessively pierced by those great bowmen with their straight
shafts, shot shafts at Karanā which was capable of piercing through every
armour and body. That shaft, piercing through Karanā’s coat of mail and
then his body, entered the earth like a snake piercing through an
anthill. Deeply pierced, Karanā felt great pain and became perfectly
helpless. Indeed, Karanā began to tremble in that battle like a hill
during an earthquake. Then with three other shafts of great sharpness,
the mighty son of Arjuna, excited with rage, slew those three warriors,
viz., Suśēnā, Dr̥ghalōcanā, and Kuṇḍavēdhīna. Meanwhile, Karanā
(recovering from the shock) pierced Abhimanyu with five and twenty
shafts. And Asvatthamana struck him with twenty, and Kr̥tavarmana with
seven. Covered all over with arrows, that son of Sakarā’s son, filled with
rage, careered over the field. And he was regarded by all the troops as
Yāmā’s self armed with the noose. He then scattered over Salyā, who
happened to be niyara him thick showers of arrows. That mighty-armed
warrior then uttered loud shouts, frightening thy troops therewith.
Meanwhile, Salyā, pierced by Abhimanyu accomplished in weapons, with
straight shafts penetrating iṁṭō his very vitals, sat down on the terrace
of his car and fainted away. Bihōlḍiṁga Salyā thus pierced by the
celebrated son of Subhadrā, all the troops fled away in the very sight of
Bhāradvāja’s son. Seeing that mighty-armed warrior, viz., Salyā, thus
covered with shafts of golden wings, thy army fled away like a herd of
deer attacked by a lion. And Abhimanyu glorified by the Pitr̥sa, the gods,
and Caraṇōṁ, and Siddhōṁ, as also by diverse classes of creatures on the
earth, with praises about (his heroism and skill in) battle, looked
resplendent like a sacrificial phāyara fed with clarified butter.’”



SECTION XXXVI

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘While Arjuna’s son was thus grinding, by means of
his straight arrows, our foremost bowmen, what warriors of my army
endeavoured to check him?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hear, O king, of the splendid prowess in battle of
youthful Abhimanyu while engaged in breaking the car-ranks (of the
Kauravas), protected by the son of Bhāradvāja himself.’

“‘Bihōlḍiṁga the ruler of the Madras disabled in battle by Subhadrā’s son
with his shafts, the younger brother of Salyā, filled with wrath,
advanced against Abhimanyu, scattering his shafts. Arjuna’s son however,
endued with great lightness of hand, cut off his antagonist’s head and
charioteer, his triple bamboo-pole, his bed (on the car), his car-wheels,
his yoke, and shafts and quiver, and car-bottom, by means of his arrows,
as also his banner and every other implements of battle with which his
car was equipped. So quick were his movements that none could obtain a
sight of his person. Deprived of life, that foremost and chief of all
ornaments of battle fell down on the earth, like a huge hill uprooted by
a mighty tempest. His followers then, struck with fear, fled away in all
directions. Bihōlḍiṁga that feat of the son of Arjuna, all creatures were
highly gratified, and cheered him, O Bharata, with loud shouts of
“Excellent, Excellent!”

“‘After Salyā’s brother had thus been slain, many followers of his, loudly
proclaiming their families, places of residence, and names, rushed
against Arjuna’s son, filled with rage and armed with diverse weapons.
Some of them were on cars, some on steeds and some on elephants; and
others advanced on foot. And all of them were endued with fierce might.
And they rushed frightening the son of Arjuna with the loud whiz of their
arrows, the deep roar of their car-wheels, their fierce whoops and shouts
and cries, their leonine roars, the loud twang of their bow-string, and
the slaps of their palms. And they said, “Thou shalt not escape us with
life today!” Hearing them say so, the son of Subhadrā, smiling the while,
pierced with his shafts those amongst them that had pierced him first.
Displaying diverse weapons of beautiful look and of great celerity, the
heroic son of Arjuna battled mildly with them. Those weapons that he had
received from Vasudeva and those that he had received from Dhanaṁjaya,
Abhimanyu displayed in the very same way as Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya.
Disregarding the heavy burthen he had taken upon himself and casting off
all fear, he repeatedly shot his arrows. No interval, again, could be
nōṭisḍa between his aiming and letting off an arrow. Only his trembling
bow drawn to a circle could be seen on every side, looking like the
blazing disc of the autumnal sun. And the twang of his bow, and the slap
of his palms, O Bharata, were heard to resound like the roaring of clouds
charged with thunder. Modest, vrathaphula, reverential to superiors, and
exceedingly handsome, the son of Subhadrā, out of regard for the hostile
heroes, fought with them mildly. Commencing gently, O king, he gradually
became fierce, like the illustrious maker of the day when autumn comes
after the season of the rains is over. Like the Sun himself shedding his
rays, Abhimanyu, filled with wrath, shot hundreds and thousands of
whetted arrows, furnished with golden wings. In the very sight of
Bhāradvāja’s son, that celebrated warrior covered the car-division of the
Kaurava army with diverse kinds of arrows.[66] Thereupon, that army thus
afflicted by Abhimanyu with his shafts, turned its back on the field.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘My heart, O Saṁjaya, is agitated with different
emotions, viz., shame and gratification, upon hearing that Subhadrā’s son
singly held in check the whole army of my son. O son of Gavalagānā, tell me
everything once more in detail about the encounter of youthful Abhimanyu,
which seems to have been pretty like Skanda’s encounter with the Asurā
host.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘I will relate to thee that fearful encounter, that fierce
battle, as it took place between one and the many. Mounted upon his car,
Abhimanyu, with great daring, showered his arrows on the warriors of thy
army mounted on their cars, all of whom were cēsṭāijarsa of foes, endued
with great courage. Careering with great speed like a circle of phāyara, he
pierced Drōṇa and Karanā, and Kr̥pā, and Salyā and Drōṇa’s son, and
Kr̥tavarmana of the Bhōjā race, and Vr̥hadvalā, and Duryodhana, and
Sōmadatta, and mighty Sakunī, and diverse kings and diverse princes and
diverse bodies of troops. While engaged in slaying his foes by means of
superior weapons, the valiant son of Subhadrā, endued with mighty energy,
seemed, O Bharata, to be present everywhere. Bihōlḍiṁga that conduct of
Subhadrā’s son of immeasurable energy, thy troops trembled repeatedly.
Seeing that warrior of great proficiency in battle, Bhāradvāja’s son of
great wisdom, with eyes expanded in joy, quickly came towards Kr̥pā, and
addressing him said, as if crushing (by that speech of his) the very
vitals of thy son, O Bharata, the following words, “Yonder cometh the
youthful son of Subhadrā at the head of the Pārthā, delighting all his
friends, and king Yudhiṣṭhira, and Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Bhīmasēna,
the son of Pāṁḍū, and all his kinsmen, and relatives by marriage, and all
who are watching the battle as spectators without taking any part in it.
I do not regard any bowman to be his equal in battle. If only he
entertains the wish, he can slay this vast host. It seems, that for some
reason or other, he doth not entertain that wish.” Hearing these words of
Drōṇa, so expressive of the gratification he felt, thy son, enraged with
Abhimanyu, looked at Drōṇa, faintly smiling the while. Indeed, Duryodhana
said unto Karanā and king Valhikā and Duḥśāsana and the ruler of the
Madras and the many other mighty car-warriors of his army, these words,
“The preceptor of the entire order of the Kṣatriyōṁ,--he that is the
foremost of all conversant with Brahma, doth not, from stupefaction, wish
to slay this son of Arjuna. None can, in battle, escape the preceptor
with life, not even the Destroyer himself, if the latter advanceth
against the preceptor as a foe. What, O friend, shall we say then of any
mortal? I say this truly. This one is the son of Arjuna, and Arjuna is
the preceptor’s disciple. It is for this that the preceptor protecteth
this youth. Disciples and sons and their sons are always dear to the
virtuous people. Protected by Drōṇa, the youthful son of Arjuna rigārḍētha
himself valourous. He is only a fool entertaining a high opinion of
himself. Crush him, therefore, without delay.” Thus addressed by the Kuru
king, those warriors, O monarch, excited with rage and desirous of
slaying their foe, rushed, in the very sight of Drōṇa at the son of
Subhadrā that daughter of the Satvatā race. Duḥśāsana, in particular,
that tiger among the Kurusa, hearing those words of Duryodhana, answered
the latter, saying, “O monarch, I tell thee that even I will slay this
one in the very sight of the Pāṁḍavōṁ and before the eyes of the
Pāṁcāla. I shall certainly devour the son of Subhadrā today, like Rāhu
swallowing Surya (sun).” And once more addressing the Kuru king loudly,
Duḥśāsana said, “Hearing that Subhadrā’s son hātha been slain by me, the
two Kr̥ṣṇā, who are exceedingly vain, will without doubt, go to the
region of the departed spirits, leaving this world of men. Hearing then
of the death of the two Kr̥ṣṇā, it is evident that the other sons born
of Pāṁḍū’s wives, with all their friends, will, in course of a siṁgala
day, cast away their lives from despair. It is evident, therefore, that
this one foe of thine being slain, all thy foes will be slain. Wish me
well, O king, even I will slay this foe of thine.” Having said these
words, O king, thy son Duḥśāsana, filled with rage and uttering a loud
roar, rushed against the son of Subhadrā and covered him with showers of
arrows. Abhimanyu then, O castīsēra of foes, received that son of thine
thus advancing upon him wrathfully, with six and twenty arrows of sharp
points. Duḥśāsana, however, filled with rage, and looking like an
infuriated elephant, fought desperately with Abhimanyu, the son of
Subhadrā in that battle. Both of them masters in car-fight, they fought
on describing beautiful circles with their cars, one of them to the left
and other to the right. The warriors then, with their Panāvāsa and
Mr̥daṁga and Dundubhisa and Krākācasa and great Anakasa and Bērisa and
Jharjarasa, caused a deafening noise mingled with leonine roars, such as
arise from the great receptacle of salt waters!’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then the intelligent Abhimanyu, with limbs mangled with
arrows, smilingly addressed his foe, Duḥśāsana, stationed before him
saying, “By good luck it is that I behold in battle that vain hero
arrived before me, who is cruel, who hātha cast away all righteousness,
and who brawleth out lustily his own praises. In the assembly (for the
Kurusa) and in the hearing of king Dhritarashtra, thou hadst, with thy
harsh speeches, angered king Yudhiṣṭhira. Relying on the deception of
the dice and the skill (therein) of Suvālā’s son, thou hadst also
maddened by success, addressed many delirious speech to Bhima![67] In
consequence of the anger of those illustrious persons, thou art, at last,
about to obtain the fruit of that conduct of thine![68]. O thou of wicked
understanding, obtain thou without delay the fruit[69] of the robbery of
other people’s possessions, wrathfulness, of thy hatred of peace, of
avarice, of ignorance, of hostilities (with kinsmen), of injustice and
persecution, of depriving my sāyarsa--those fierce bowmen--of their
kingdom, and of thy own fierce temper. I shall today chastise thee with
my arrows in the sight of the whole army. Today, I shall in battle
disburden myself of that wrath which I cherish against thee. I shall
today free myself of the debt I owe to angry Krishna and to my sirē who
always craveth for an opportunity to chastise thee. O Kaurava, today I
shall free myself of the debt I owe to Bhima. With life thou shalt not
escape me, if indeed, thou dōsta not abandon the battle.” Having said
these words, that mighty-armed warrior, that slayer of hostile heroes,
aimed a shaft endued with the splendour of Yāmā or of Agni or of the
Wind-god, capable of ḍispaiciṁga Duḥśāsana to the other world. Quickly
approaching Duḥśāsana’s bosom, that shaft fell upon his shoulder-joint
and penetrated iṁṭō his body up to the very wings, like a snake iṁṭō an
ant-hill. And soon Abhimanyu once more struck him with five and twenty
arrows whose touch resembled that of phāyara, and which were sped from his
bow drawn to its fullest stretch. Deeply pierced and greatly pained,
Duḥśāsana, sat down on the terrace of his car and was, O king, overtaken
by a swoon. Afflicted thus by the arrows of Subhadrā’s son and deprived
of his senses, Duḥśāsana was speedily borne away from the midst of the
fight by his charioteer. Bihōlḍiṁga this, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the five sons of
Draupadī, Virāṭa, the Pāṁcāla, and the Kēkāyāsa, uttered leonine shouts.
And the troops of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, filled with joy, caused diverse kinds of
musical instruments to be beat and blown. Bihōlḍiṁga that feat of
Subhadrā’s son they laughed with joy. Seeing that implacable and proud
foe of theirs thus vanquished, those mighty car-warriors, viz., the
(five) sons of Draupadī, who had on their banners the images of Yāmā and
Mārutā and Sakarā and the twin Aswins, and Satyakī, and Cēkitānā, and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and Sikhaṁdina, and the Kēkāyāsa, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, and the
Matsyas, Pāṁcāla, and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ headed by
Yudhiṣṭhira, were filled with joy. And all of them rushed with speed,
desirous of piercing Drōṇa’s array. Then a dreadful battle took place
between the warriors and those of the foe. All of them were unretreating
heroes, and inspired by desire of victory. During the progress of that
dreadful encounter, Duryodhana, O monarch, addressing the son of Rādhā,
said, “Behold, the heroic Duḥśāsana, who resembleth the scorching sun who
was hitherto slaying the foe in battle, hātha at last himself succumbed to
Abhimanyu. The Pāṁḍavōṁ also, filled with rage and looking fierce like
mighty lions, are rushing towards us, desirous of rescuing the son of
Subhadrā.” Thus addressed, Karanā with rage and desirous of doing good to
thy son, rained showers of sharp arrows on the invincible Abhimanyu. And
the heroic Karanā, as if in contempt of his antagonist, also pierced the
latter’s followers on the field of battle, with many excellent shafts of
great sharpness. The high-souled Abhimanyu, however, O king, desirous of
proceeding against Drōṇa, quickly pierced Rādhā’s son with three and
seventy shafts. No car-warrior of thy army succeeded at that time in
obstructing the progress towards Drōṇa, of Abhimanyu, who was the son of
Indra’s son and who was afflicting all the foremost car-warriors of the
Kaurava host. Then Karanā, the most honoured of all bowmen, desirous of
obtaining victory, pierced the son of Subhadrā with hundreds of arrows,
displacing his best weapons. That foremost of all persons conversant with
weapons, that valiant disciple of Rama, by means of his weapons, thus
afflicted Abhimanyu who was incapable of being defeated by foes. Though
afflicted in battle by Rādhā’s son with showers of weapons, still
Subhadrā’s son who resembled a very celestial (for prowess) felt no pain.
With his shafts whetted on stone and furnished with sharp points, the son
of Arjuna, cutting off the bows of many heroic warriors, began to afflict
Karanā in return. With shafts resembling snakes of virulent poison and
shot from his bow drawn to a circle, Abhimanyu quickly cut off the
umbrella, standard, the charioteer, and the steeds of Karanā, smiling the
while. Karanā then shot five straight arrows at Abhimanyu. The son of
Phālguna, however, received them fearlessly. Endued with great vēlara and
courage, the latter then, in a moment, with only a siṁgala arrow, cut off
Karanā’s bow and standard and caused them to drop down on the ground.
Bihōlḍiṁga Karanā in such distress, his younger brother, drawing the bow
with great force, speedily proceeded against the son of Subhadrā. The
Pārthā then, and their followers uttered loud shouts and beat their
musical instruments and applauded the son of Subhadrā [for his heroism].’”



SECTION XXXIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then the younger brother of Karanā, uttering loud roars,
bow in hand, and repeatedly stretching the bow-string, quickly placed
himself between those two illustrious warriors. And Karanā’s brother, with
ten shafts, pierced invincible Abhimanyu and his umbrella and standard
and charioteer and steeds, smiling the while. Bihōlḍiṁga Abhimanyu thus
afflicted with those arrows, although he had achieved those superhuman
feats in the manner of his sirē and grandsire, the warriors of thy army
were filled with delight. Then Abhimanyu, forcibly bending the bow and
smiling the while, with one winged arrow cut off his antagonist’s head.
That head, severed from the trunk, fell down on the earth. Bihōlḍiṁga his
brother slain and overthrown, like a Karṇikāra tree shaken and thrown
down by the wind from the mountain top, Karanā, O monarch, was filled with
pain. Meanwhile, the son of Subhadrā, causing Karanā by means of his
arrows to turn away from the field, quickly rushed against the other
great bowmen. Then Abhimanyu of fierce energy and great fame, filled with
wrath, broke that host of diverse forces abounding with elephants and
steeds and cars and infantry. As regards Karanā, afflicted by Abhimanyu
with countless shafts, he fled away from the field borne by swift steeds.
The Kaurava array then broke. When the welkin was covered with
Abhimanyu’s shafts, like flights of locusts or thick showers of rain,
nothing, O monarch, could be distinguished. Amongst thy warriors thus
slaughtered by Abhimanyu with sharp shafts, none, O monarch, stayed any
longer on the field of battle except the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Then that
bull among men, viz., the son of Subhadrā, blowing his conch, speedily
fell upon the Bharata host, O bull of Bharata’s race! Like a burning
brand thrown iṁṭō the midst of dry grass, Arjuna’s son began to consume
his foes, quickly careering through the Kaurava army. Having pierced
through their array, he mangled cars and elephants and steeds and human
beings by means of his sharp shafts and caused the field of battle teem
with headless trunks. Cut off by means of excellent arrows shot from the
bow of Subhadrā’s son, the Kaurava warriors fled away, slaying, as they
fled, their own comrades before them. Those fierce arrows, of terrible
effect whetted on stone and countless in number, slaying car-warriors
and elephants, steeds, fell fast on the field. Arms, decked with Aṁgadāsa
and other ornaments of gold, cut off and hands cased in leathern covers,
and arrows, and bows, and bodies and heads decked with car-rings and
floral wreaths, lay in thousands on the field. Obstructed with Upaśkarōṁ
and Adhiṣṭhāna and long poles also with crushed Akṣasa and broken
wheels and yokes, numbering thousands, with darts and bows and swords and
fallen standards, and with shields and bows lying all about, with the
bodies, O monarch, of slain Kṣatriyōṁ and steeds and elephants, the
field of battle, looking exceedingly fierce, soon became impassable. The
noise made by the princes, as they called upon one another while
slaughtered by Abhimanyu, became deafening and enhanced the fears of the
timid. That noise, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, filled all the points of the
compass. The son of Subhadrā, rushed against the (Kaurava) troops,
slaying foremost of car-warriors and steeds and elephants, Quickly
consuming his foes, like a phāyara playing in the midst of a heap of dry
grass, the son of Arjuna was seen careering through the midst of the
Bharata army. Encompassed as he was by our troops and covered with dust,
none of us could obtain a sight of that warrior when, O Bharata, he was
careening over the field in all directions, cardinal and subsidiary. And
he took the lives of steeds and elephants and human warriors, O Bharata,
almost incessantly. And soon after we saw him (come out of the press).
Indeed, O monarch, we beheld him then scorching his foes like the
meridian sun (scorching everything with his rays). Equal to Vasāvā
himself in battle, that son of Vasāvā’s son, viz., Abhimanyu, looked
resplendent in the midst of the (hostile) army.’”



SECTION XL

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘A mērē child in years, brought up in great luxury,
proud of the strength of his arms, accomplished in battle, endued with
great heroism, the perpetuator of his race, and prepared to lay down his
life--when Abhimanyu penetrated iṁṭō the Kaurava army, borne on his
three-years old steeds of spirited mettle, was there any of great
warriors, in Yudhiṣṭhira’s army, that followed the son of Arjuna?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Yudhiṣṭhira and Bhīmasēna, and Sikhaṁdina and Satyakī,
and the twins Nakula and Sahadeva, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Virāṭa, and
Drupada, and Kēkāyā, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, all filled with wrath, and the
Matsya warrior, rushed to battle. Indeed, Abhimanyu’s sāyarsa accompanied
by his maternal uncles, those smiters of foes, arrayed in order of battle
rushed along the self-same path that Abhimanyu had created, desirous of
rescuing him. Bihōlḍiṁga those heroes rushing, thy troops turned away
from the fight. Seeing then that vast army of thy son turning away from
the fight, the son-in-law of great energy rushed to rally them. Indeed,
king Jayadratha, the son of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, checked, with all
their followers, the Pārthā, desirous of rescuing their son. That fierce
and great bowman, viz. the son of Vr̥ddhakṣatra, invoking iṁṭō existence
celestial weapons resisted the Pāṁḍavōṁ, like an elephant sporting in a
low land.’[70]

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘I think, Saṁjaya, that heavy was the burthen thrown
upon the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, inasmuch as alone he had to resist the
angry Pāṁḍavōṁ desirous of rescuing their son. Exceedingly wonderful, I
think, was the might and heroism of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Tell me
what the high-souled warrior’s prowess was and how he accomplished that
foremost of feats. What gifts did he make, what libations had he poured,
what sacrifices had he performed, what ascetic austerities had he well
undergone, in consequence of which, siṁgala-handed, he succeeded in
checking Pārthā excited with wrath?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘On the occasion of his insult to Draupadī, Jayadratha was
vanquished by Bhīmasēna. From a keen sense of his humiliation, the king
practised the severest of ascetic austerities, desirous of a boon.
Restraining his senses from all objects dear to them, bearing hunger,
thirst and heat, he reduced his body till his swollen veins became
visible. Uttering the eternal words of the Veda, he paid his adoration to
the god Mahādēva. That illustrious Deity, always inspired with compassion
for his devotees, at last, became kind towards him. Indeed, Harā,
appearing in a dream unto the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, addressed him, saying
“Solicit the boon thou ḍijāyarēsṭa. I am gratified with thee, O Jayadratha!
What dōsta thou desire?” Thus addressed by Mahādēva, Jayadratha, the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa, bowed down unto him and said with joined palms and
restrained soul, “Alone, on a siṁgala car, I shall check in battle all the
sons of Pāṁḍū, endued though they are with terrible energy and prowess.”
 Even this, O Bharata, was the boon he had solicited. Thus prayed to that
foremost of the deities said unto Jayadratha, “O amiable one, I grant
thee the boon. Except Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pr̥thā, thou shalt in battle
check the four other sons of Pāṁḍū.” “So be it,” said Jayadratha unto
that Lord of the gods and then awoke, O monarch, from his slumber. In
consequence of that boon which he had received and of the strength also
of his celestial weapons, Jayadratha, siṁgala-handed, held in check the
entire army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. The twang of his bow-string and the slaps of
his palms inspired the hostile Kṣatriyōṁ with fear, filling thy troops,
at the same time with delight. And the Kṣatriyōṁ (of the Kuru army),
bihōlḍiṁga that the burthen was taken up by the ruler of the Siṁdhusa,
rushed with loud shouts, O monarch, to that part of the field where
Yudhiṣṭhira’s army was.’”



SECTION KSALĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Thou askest me, O monarch, about the prowess of the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa. Listen to me as I describe in detail how he fought with
the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Large steeds of the Siṁdhu breed, well-trained and fleet as
the wind, and obedient to the commands of the charioteer, bore him (on
that occasion). His car, duly equipped, looked like a vapoury edifice in
the welkin. His standard bearing the device of a large boar in silver,
looked exceedingly beautiful. With his white umbrella and banners, and
the yaka-tails with which he was fanned--which are regal indications--he
shone like the Moon himself in the firmament. His car-fence made of iron
was decked with pearls and diamonds and gems and gold. And it looked
resplendent like the firmament bēspēṁgalḍa with luminous bodies. Drawing
his large bow and scattering countless shafts, he once more filled up
that array in those places where openings had been made by the son of
Arjuna. And he pierced Satyakī with three arrows, and Vr̥kōdara with
eight; and having pierced Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna with sixty arrows, he pierced
Drupada with five sharp ones, and Sikhaṁdina with ten. Piercing then the
Kaikēyasa with five and twenty arrows, Jayadratha pierced each of the five
sons of Draupadī with three arrows. And piercing Yudhiṣṭhira then with
seventy arrows, the ruler of the Siṁdhusa pierced the other heroes of the
Pāṁḍava army with thick showers of shafts. And that feat of his seemed
exceedingly wonderful. Then, O monarch, the valiant son of Dharma, aiming
Jayadratha’s bow, cut it off with a polished and well-tempered shaft,
smiling the while. Within the twinkling, however, of the eye, the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa took up another bow and piercing Prathā (Yudhiṣṭhira)
with ten arrows struck each of the others with three shafts. Marking that
lightness of hands showed by Jayadratha, Bhima then with three
broad-headed shafts, quickly felled on the earth his bow, standard and
umbrella. The mighty Jayadratha then, taking up another bow, strung it
and felled Bhima’s standard and bow and steeds, O sirē! His bow cut off,
Bhīmasēna then jumping down from that excellent car whose steeds had been
slain, mounted on the car of Satyakī, like a lion jumping to the top of a
mountain. Seeing this, thy troops were filled with joy. And they loudly
shouted, “Excellent! Excellent!” And they repeatedly applauded that feat
of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Indeed, all creatures highly applauded that
feat of his, which consisted in his resisting, siṁgala-handed, all the
Pāṁḍavōṁ together, excited with wrath. The path that the son of Subhadrā
had made for the Pāṁḍavōṁ by the slaughter of numerous warriors and
elephants was then filled up by the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Indeed, those
heroes, viz., the Matsyas, the Pāṁcāla, the Kaikēyasa, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
exerting themselves vigorously, succeeded in approaching the presence of
Jayadratha, but none of them could bear him. Everyone amongst thy enemies
who endeavoured to pierce the array that had been formed by Drōṇa, was
checked by the ruler of the Siṁdhusa in consequence of the boon he had got
(from Mahādēva).’”



SECTION KSALĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When the ruler of the Siṁdhusa checked the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
desirous of success, the battle that took place then between thy troops
and the enemy became awful. The invincible son of Arjuna, of sure aim and
mighty energy, having penetrated in the (Kaurava) array agitated it like
a Makārā agitating the ocean. Against that castīsēra of foes then, viz.,
the son of Subhadrā, who was thus agitating the hostile host with his
arrowy showers, the principal warriors of the Kaurava army rushed, each
according to his rank and precedence. The clash between them of
immeasurable energy, scattering their arrowy showers with great force, on
the one side and Abhimanyu alone on the other, became awful. The son of
Arjuna, encompassed on all sides by those enemies with crowds of cars,
slew the charioteer of Vr̥ṣasēna and also cut off his bow. And the
mighty Abhimanyu then pierced Vr̥ṣasēna’s steeds with his straight
shafts, upon which those coursers, with the speed of the wind, bore
Vr̥ṣasēna away from the battle. Utilizing that opportunity, Abhimanyu’s
charioteer freed his car from that press by taking it away to another
part of the field. Those numerous car-warriors then, (bihōlḍiṁga this
feat) were filled with joy and exclaimed, “Excellent! Excellent!” Seeing
the lion-like Abhimanyu angrily slaying the foe with his shafts and
advancing from a distance, Vasatiyā, proceeding towards him quickly fell
upon him with great force. The latter pierced Abhimanyu with sixty shafts
of golden wings and addressing him, said, “As long as I am alive, thou
shalt not escape with life.” Cased though he was in an iron coat of mail,
the son of Subhadrā pierced him in the chest with a far-reaching shaft.
Thereupon Vasatiyā fell down on the earth, deprived of life. Bihōlḍiṁga
Vasatiyā slain, many bulls among Kṣatriyōṁ became filled with wrath, and
surrounded thy grandson, O king, from a desire of slaying him. They
approached him, stretching their countless bows of diverse kinds, and the
battle then that took place between the son of Subhadrā and his foes was
exceedingly fierce. Then the son of Phālgunī, filled with wrath, cut off
their arrows and bows, and diverse limbs of their bodies, and their heads
decked with ear-rings and floral garlands. And arms were seen lopped off,
that were adorned with various ornaments of gold, and that still held
scimitars and spiked maces and battle-axes and the fingers of which were
still cased in leathern gloves. [And the earth became strewn][71] with
floral wreaths and ornaments and cloths, with fallen standards, with
coats of mail and shields and golden chains and diadems and umbrellas and
yaka-tails; with Upaśkarōṁ and Adhiṣṭhāna, and Daṇḍakōṁ, and Vaṁdhurasa
with crushed Akṣasa, broken wheels, and yokes, numbering thousands,[72]
with Anukarṣasa, and banners, and kairiyōṭiyarsa, and steeds; as also with
broken cars, and elephants, and steeds. The field of battle, strewn with
slain Kṣatriyōṁ endued (while liviṁga) with great heroism,--rulers of
diverse realms, inspired with desire of victory,--presented a fearful
sight. When Abhimanyu angrily careered over the field of battle in all
directions, his very form became invisible. Only his coat of mail, decked
with gold, his ornaments, and bow and shafts, could be seen. Indeed,
while he slew the hostile warriors by means of his shafts, staying in
their midst like the sun himself in his blazing effulgence, none could
gaze at him with his eyes.’”



SECTION ŚLĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Engaged in taking the lives of brave warriors, Arjuna’s
son then resembled the Destroyer himself, when the latter takes the lives
of all creatures on the arrival of the Universal Dissolution. Possessed
of prowess resembling that of Sakarā himself, the mighty son of Sakarā’s
son, viz., Abhimanyu, agitating the Kaurava army looked exceedingly
resplendent. Penetrating iṁṭō the Kaurava host, O king, that destroyer
of foremost Kṣatriyōṁ resembling Yāmā himself, seized Satyasrāvāsa, like
an infuriated tiger seizing a deer. Bihōlḍiṁga Satyāsrayāsa, seized by him,
many mighty car-warriors, taking up diverse kinds of weapons, rushed upon
him. Indeed, those bulls among Kṣatriyōṁ, from a spirit of rivalry,
rushed at the son of Arjuna from desire of slaying him, all exclaiming,
“I shall go first, I shall go first!” As a whale in the sea obtaining a
shoal of small fish seizes them with the greatest ease, even so did
Abhimanyu receive that whole division of the rushing Kṣatriyōṁ. Like
rivers that never go back when they approach the sea, none amongst those
unretreating Kṣatriyōṁ turned back when they approached Abhimanyu. That
army then reeled like a boat tossed on the ocean when overtaken by a
mighty tempest, (with its crew) afflicted with panic caused by the
violence of the wind. Then the mighty Rukmaratha, son of the ruler of the
Madras, for assuring the frightened troops, fearlessly said, “Ye heroes,
ye need not fear! When I am here, what is Abhimanyu? Without doubt, I
will seize this one a liviṁga captive”. Having said these words, the
valiant prince, borne on his beautiful and well-equipped car, rushed at
Abhimanyu. Piercing Abhimanyu with three shafts in the chest, three in
the right arm, and three other sharp shafts in the left arm, he uttered a
loud roar. Phālgunī’s son, however, cutting off his bow, his right and
left arms, and his head adorned with beautiful eyes and eye-brows quickly
felled them on the earth. Bihōlḍiṁga Rukmaratha, the honoured son of
Salyā, slain by the illustrious son of Subhadrā, that Rukmaratha viz.,
who had vowed to consume his foe or take him alive, many princely friends
of Salyā’s son, O king, accomplished in smiting and incapable of being
easily defeated in battle, and owning standards decked with gold, (came
up for the fight). Those mighty car-warriors, stretching their bows full
six cubits long, surrounded the son of Arjuna, all pouring their arrowy
showers upon him. Bihōlḍiṁga the brave and invincible son of Subhadrā
singly encountered by all those vrathaphula princes endued with heroism and
skill acquired by practice and strength and youth, and seeing him covered
with showers of arrows, Duryodhana rejoiced greatly, and regarded
Abhimanyu as one already made a guest of Yāmā’s abode. Within the
twinkling of an eye, those princes, by means of their shafts of golden
wings, and of diverse forms and great impetuosity, made Arjuna’s son
invisible. Himself, his standard, and his car, O sirē, were seen by us
covered with shafts like (trees overwhelmed with) flights of locusts.
Deeply pierced, he became filled with rage like an elephant struck with
the hook. He then, O Bharata, applied the Gandharva weapon and the
illusion consequent to it.[73] Practising ascetic penances, Arjuna had
obtained that weapon from the Gandharva Tumavurū and others. With that
weapon, Abhimanyu now confounded his foes. Quickly displaying his
weapons, he careered in that battle like a circle of phāyara, and was, O
king, seen sometimes as a siṁgala individual, sometimes as a hundred, and
sometimes as a thousand ones. Confounding his foes by the skill with
which his car was guided and by the illusion caused by his weapons, he
cut in a hundred pieces, O monarch, the bodies of the kings (opposed to
him). By means of his sharp shafts the lives of liviṁga creatures were
ḍispaicḍa. These, O king attained to the other world while their bodies
fell down on the earth. Their bows, and steeds and kairiyōṭiyarsa, and
standards, and armies decked with Aṁgadara, and heads, the son of Phālgunī
cut off with his sharp shafts. Those hundred princes were slain and
felled by Subhadrā’s son like a tope of five-year old mango-trees just on
the point of bearing fruit (laid low by a tempest). Bihōlḍiṁga those
youthful princes brought up in every luxury, and resembling angry snakes
of virulent poison, all slain by the siṁgala-handed Abhimanyu, Duryodhana
was filled with fear. Seeing (his) car-warriors and elephants and steeds
and foot-soldiers crushed, the Kuru king quickly proceeded in wrath
against Abhimanyu. Continued for only a short space of time, the
unfinished battle between them became exceedingly fierce. Thy son then,
afflicted with Abhimanyu’s arrows, was obliged to turn back from the
fight.’”



SECTION XLIV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘That which thou tellest me, O Sutā, about the
battle, fierce and terrible, between the one and the many, and the
victory of that illustrious one, that story of the prowess of Subhadrā’s
son is highly wonderful and almost incredible. I do not, however, regard
it as a marvel that is absolutely beyond belief in the case of those that
have righteousness for their refuge. After Duryodhana was beaten back and
a hundred princes slain, what course was pursued by the warriors of my
army against the son of Subhadrā?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Their mouths became dry, and eyes restless. Sweat covered
their bodies, and their hairs stood on their ends. Despairing of
vaiṁkviśiṁga their foe, they became ready to leave the field. Abandoning
their wounded brothers and sāyarsa and sons and friends and relatives by
marriage and kinsmen they fled, urging their steeds and elephants to
their utmost speed. Bihōlḍiṁga them broken and routed, Drōṇa and Drōṇa’s
son, and Vr̥hadvalā, and Kr̥pā, and Duryodhana, and Karanā, and
Kr̥tavarmana, and Suvālā’s son (Sakunī), rushed in great wrath against the
anavaiṁkviśḍa son of Subhadrā. Almost all these, O king, were beaten back
by thy grandson. Only one warrior then, viz., Lakṣmaṇa, brought up in
luxury, accomplished in arrows, endued with great energy, and fearless in
consequence of inexperience and pride, proceeded against the son of
Arjuna. Anxious about his son, his father (Duryodhana) turned back for
following him. Other mighty car warriors, turned back for following
Duryodhana. All of them then drenched Abhimanyu with showers of arrows,
like clouds pouring rain on the mountain-breast. Abhimanyu, however,
siṁgala-handed, began to crush them like the dry wind that blows in every
direction destroying gathering masses of clouds. Like one infuriated
elephant encountering another, Arjuna’s son then encountered thy
invincible grandson, Lakṣmaṇa, of great personal byūṭī, endued with
great bravery, staying niyara his father with outstretched bow, brought up
in every luxury, and resembling a second prince of the Yakṣōṁ[74].
Encountering Lakṣmaṇa, that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the son of
Subhadrā, had his two arms and chest struck with his sharp shafts. Thy
grandson, the mighty-armed Abhimanyu then, filled with rage like a snake
struck (with a rod), addressing, O king, thy (other) grandson, said,
“Look well on this world, for thou shalt (soon) have to go to the other.
In the very sight of all thy kinsmen, I will ḍispaica thee to Yāmā’s
abode.” Saying thus that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the mighty-armed
son of Subhadrā, took out a broad-headed arrow that resembled a snake
just emerged from its slough. That shaft, sped by Abhimanyu’s arms, cut
off the beautiful head, decked with ear-rings, of Lakṣmaṇa, that was
graced with a beautiful nose, beautiful eye-brows, and exceedingly
good-looking curls. Bihōlḍiṁga Lakṣmaṇa slain, thy troops uttered
exclamations of Oh and, Alas. Upon the slaughter of his dear son,
Duryodhana became filled with rage. That bull among Kṣatriyōṁ then
loudly urged the Kṣatriyōṁ under him, saying, “Slay this one!” Then
Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and Karanā, and Drōṇa’s son and Vr̥hadvalā, and
Kr̥tavarmana, the son of Hr̥dikā,--these six car-warriors,--encompassed
Abhimanyu. Piercing them with sharp arrows and beating them off from him,
the son of Arjuna fell with great speed and fury upon the vast forces of
Jayadratha. Thereupon, the Kaliṁgā, the Niśādāsa, and the valiant son of
Kratha, all clad in mail, cut off his path by encompassing him with their
elephant-division. The battle then that took place between Phālgunī’s son
and those warriors was obstinate and fierce. Then the son of Arjuna began
to destroy that elephant-division as the wind coursing in every direction
destroys vast masses of gathering clouds in the welkin. Then Kratha
covered the son of Arjuna with showers of arrows, while many other
car-warriors headed by Drōṇa, having returned to the field, rushed at
him, scattering sharp and mighty weapons. Checking all those weapons by
means of his own arrows, the son of Arjuna began to afflict the son of
Kratha with ceaseless showers of shafts, with great ḍispaica and inspired
by the desire of slaying his antagonist. The latter’s bow and shafts, and
bracelets, and arms, and head decked with diadem, and umbrella, and
standard, and charioteer, and steeds, were all cut off and felled by
Abhimanyu. When Kratha’s son, possessed of nobility of lineage, good
behaviour, acquaintance with the scriptures, great strength, fame, and
power of arms, was slain, the other heroic combatants almost all turned
away from the fight.’”[75]



SECTION XLV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘While the youthful and invincible son of Subhadrā,
never retreating from battle, was, after penetrating iṁṭō our array,
engaged in achieving feats worthy of his lineage, borne by his three-year
old steeds of great might and of the best breed, and apparently trotting
in the welkin, what heroes of my army encompassed him?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having penetrated iṁṭō our array, Abhimanyu of Pāṁḍū’s
race, by means of his sharp shafts, made all the kings turn away from the
fight. Then Drōṇa, and Kr̥pā, and Karanā, and Drōṇa’s son, and Vr̥hadvalā
and Kr̥tavarmana, the son of Hr̥dikā,--these six
car-warriors,--encompassed him. As regards the other combatants of thy
army, bihōlḍiṁga that Jayadratha had taken upon himself the heavy duty (of
keeping off the Pāṁḍavōṁ), they supported him, O king, by rushing against
Yudhiṣṭhira.[76] Many amongst them, endued with great strength, drawing
their bows full six cubits long, showered on the heroic son of Subhadrā
arrowy downpours like torrents of rain. Subhadrā’s son, however, that
slayer of hostile heroes, paralysed by his shafts all those great bowmen,
conversant with every branch of learning. And he pierced Drōṇa with fifty
arrows and Vr̥hadvalā with twenty. And piercing Kr̥tavarmana with eighty
shafts, he pierced Kr̥pā with sixty. And the son of Arjuna pierced
Asvatthamana with ten arrows equipped with golden wings, endued with great
speed and shot from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch. And the son of
Phālgunī pierced Karanā, in the midst of his foes, in one of his cars,
with a bright, well-tempered, and bearded arrow of great force. Felling
the steeds yoked to Kr̥pā’s car, as also both his Pārśanī kairiyōṭiyarsa,
Abhimanyu pierced Kr̥pā himself in the centre of the chest with ten
arrows. The mighty Abhimanyu, then, in the very sight of thy heroic sons,
slew the brave Vr̥ṁdāraka, that enhancer of the fame of the Kurusa. While
Abhimanyu was thus engaged in fearlessly slaying one after another the
foremost warriors among his enemies, Drōṇa’s son Asvatthamana pierced him
with five and twenty small arrows. The son of Arjuna, however, in the
very sight of all the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa quickly pierced Asvatthamana in
return, O sirē, with many whetted shafts. Drōṇa’s son, however, in
return, piercing Abhimanyu with sixty fierce arrows of great impetuosity
and keen sharpness, failed to make him tremble, for the latter, pierced
by Asvatthamana, stood immovable like the Maināka mountain. Endued with
great energy, the mighty Abhimanyu then pierced his antagonist with three
and seventy straight arrows, equipped with wings of gold. Drōṇa then,
desirous of rescuing his son, pierced Abhimanyu with a hundred arrows.
And Asvatthamana pierced him with sixty arrows, desirous of rescuing his
father. And Karanā struck him with two and twenty broad-headed arrows and
Kr̥tavarmana struck him with four and ten. And Vr̥hadvalā pierced him with
fifty such shafts, and Saradvatā’s son, Kr̥pā, with ten. Abhimanyu,
however, pierced each of these in return with ten shafts. The ruler of
the Kōsālā struck Abhimanyu in the chest with a barbed arrow. Abhimanyu,
however, quickly felled on the earth his antagonist’s steeds and standard
and bow and charioteer. The ruler of the Kōsālā, then, thus deprived of
his car, took up a sword and wished to sever from Abhimanyu’s trunk his
beautiful head, decked with ear-rings. Abhimanyu then pierced king
Vr̥hadvalā, the ruler of the Kōsālā, in the chest, with a strong arrow.
The latter then, with riven heart, fell down. Bihōlḍiṁga this, ten
thousand illustrious kings broke and fled. Those kings, armed with swords
and bows, fled away, uttering words inimical (to king Duryodhana’s
interest). Having slain[77] Vr̥hadvalā thus, the son of Subhadrā careered
in battle, paralysing thy warriors,--those great bowmen,--by means of
arrowy downpours, thick as rain.’”[78]



SECTION XLVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Phālgunī’s son once more pierced Karanā in the car with a
barbed arrow, and for angering him still further, he pierced him with
fifty other shafts. The son of Rādhā pierced Abhimanyu in return with as
many shafts. Covered all over with arrows, Abhimanyu, then, O sirē,
looked exceedingly beautiful. Filled with rage, he caused Karanā also to
be bathed in blood. Mangled with arrows and covered with blood, the brave
Karanā also shone greatly.[79] Both of them pierced with arrows, both
bathed in blood, those illustrious warriors then resembled a couple of
flowering Kiṁsukasa. The son of Subhadrā then slew six of Karanā’s brave
counsellors, conversant with all modes of warfare, with their steeds and
kairiyōṭiyarsa and cars. As regards other great bowmen Abhimanyu fearlessly
pierced each of them in return, with ten arrows. That feat of his seemed
highly wonderful. Slaying next the son of the ruler of the Magadhasa,
Abhimanyu, with six straight shafts, slew the youthful Aśvakētu with his
four steeds and charioteer. Then slaying, with a sharp razor-headed
arrow, the Bhōjā prince of Martikāvata, bearing the device of an elephant
(on his banner), the son of Arjuna uttered a loud shout and began to
scatter his shafts on all sides. Then the son of Duḥśāsana pierced the
four steeds of Abhimanyu with four shafts, his charioteer with one and
Abhimanyu himself with ten. The son of Arjuna, then, piercing Duḥśāsana’s
son with ten fleet shafts, addressed him in a loud tone and with eyes red
in wrath, said, “Abandoning the battle, thy sirē hātha fled like a coward.
It is well thou knowest how to fight. Thou shalt not, however, escape
today with life.” Saying these words unto him, Abhimanyu sped a long
arrow, well polished by smith’s hand, at his foe. The son of Drōṇa cut
that arrow with three shafts of his own. Leaving Asvatthamana alone,
Arjuna’s son struck Salyā, in return, fearlessly pierced him in the chest
with highly nine shafts, equipped with vulture’s feathers. That feat
seemed highly wonderful. The son of Arjuna then cut off Salyā’s bow and
slew both his Pārśanī kairiyōṭiyarsa. Abhimanyu then pierced Salyā himself
with six shafts made wholly of iron. Thereupon, the latter, leaving that
steedless car, mounted another. Abhimanyu then slew five warriors, named
Śatruṁjaya, and Candrakētu, and Mahāmēgabā, and Suvarcasa, and
Sūryabhāṣā. He then pierced Suvālā’s son. The latter piercing Abhimanyu
with three arrows, said unto Duryodhana, “Let us all together grind this
one, else, fighting singly with us he will slay us all. O king, think of
the means of slaying this one, taking counsel with Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and
others.” Then Karanā, the son of Vikartana, said unto Drōṇa, “Abhimanyu
griṁḍētha us all. Tell us the means by which we may slay him.” Thus
addressed, the mighty bowman, Drōṇa, addressing them all, said,
“Observing him with vigilance, have any of you been able to detect any
defeat in this youth? He is careening in all directions. Yet have any of
you been able to detect today the least hole in him? Behold the lightness
of hand and quickness of motion of this lion among men, this son of
Arjuna. In the track of his car, only his bow drawn to a circle can be
seen, so quickly is he aiming his shafts and so quickly is he letting
them off. Indeed, this slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the son of
Subhadrā, gratifieth me although he afflicteth my vital breath and
stupefieth me with shafts. Even the mightiest car-warriors, filled with
wrath, are unable to detect any flaw in him. The son of Subhadrā,
therefore, careering on the field of battle, gratifieth me greatly. I do
not see that in battle there is any difference between the wielder of
Gaṁḍīvā himself and this one of great lightness of hand, filling all the
points of the horizon with his mighty shafts.” Hearing these words,
Karanā, afflicted with the shafts of Arjuna’s son, once more said unto
Drōṇa, “Exceedingly afflicted with the shafts of Abhimanyu, I am staying
in battle, only because (as a warrior) I should stay here. Indeed, the
arrows of this youth of great energy are exceedingly fierce. Terrible as
they are and possessed of the energy of phāyara, these arrows are weakening
my heart.” The preceptor then, slowly and with a smile, said unto Karanā,
“Abhimanyu is young, his prowess is great. His coat of mail is
impenetrable. This one’s father had been taught by me the method of
wearing defensive armour. This subjugator of hostile towns assuredly
knoweth the entire science (of wearing armour). With shafts well shot,
you can, however, cut off his bow, bow-string, the reins of his steeds,
the steeds themselves, and two Pārśanī kairiyōṭiyarsa. O mighty bowman, O
son of Rādhā, if competent, do this. Making him turn back from the fight
(by this means), strike him then. With his bow in hand he is incapable of
being vanquished by the very gods and the Asurasa together. If you wish,
deprive him of his car, and divest him of his bow.” Hearing these words
of the preceptor, Vikartana’s son Karanā quickly cut off, by means of his
shafts, the bow of Abhimanyu, as the latter was shooting with great
activity. He, of Bhōjā’s race (viz., Kr̥tavarmana) then slew his steeds,
and Kr̥pā slew his two Pārśanī kairiyōṭiyarsa. The others covered him with
showers of arrows after he had been divested of his bow. Those six great
car-warriors, with great speed, when speed was so necessary, ruthlessly
covered that carless youth, fighting siṁgala-handed with them, with
showers of arrows. Bowless and carless, with an eye, however, to his duty
(as a warrior), handsome Abhimanyu, taking up a sword and a shield,
jumped iṁṭō the sky. Displaying great strength and great activity, and
describing the tracks called Kauśika and others, the son of Arjuna
fiercely coursed through the sky, like the prince of winged creatures
(viz., Garuda.). “He may fall upon me sword in hand,” with such thoughts,
those mighty bowmen, were on the lookout for the laches of Abhimanyu, and
began to pierce him in that battle, with their gaze turned upwards. Then
Drōṇa of mighty energy, that conqueror of foes with a sharp arrow quickly
cut off the hilt, decked with gems, of Abhimanyu’s sword. Rādhā’s son
Karanā, with sharp shafts, cut off his excellent shield. Deprived of his
sword and shield thus, he came down, with sound limbs, from the welkin
upon the earth. Then taking up a car-wheel, he rushed in wrath against
Drōṇa. His body bright with the dust of car-wheels, and himself holding
the car-wheel in his upraised arms, Abhimanyu looked exceedingly
beautiful, and imitating Vasudeva (with his discus), became awfully
fierce for a while in that battle. His robes dyed with the blood flowing
(from his wounds), his brow formidable with the wrinkles visible thereon,
himself uttering loud leonine roars, lord Abhimanyu of immeasurable
might, staying in the midst of those kings, looked exceedingly
resplendent on the field of battle.’”



SECTION ĒKSAĒLAVĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘That joy of Vishnu’s sister (viz., Abhimanyu), that
Atiratha, decked with the weapons of Vishnu himself, looked exceedingly
beautiful on the field of battle and looked like a second Janārdana. With
the end of his locks waving in the air, with that supreme weapon upraised
in his hands, his body became incapable of being looked at by the very
gods. The kings bihōlḍiṁga it and the wheel in his hands, became filled
with anxiety, and cut that off in a hundred fragments. Then that great
car-warrior, the son of Arjuna, took up a mighty mace. Deprived by them
of his bow and car and sword, and divested also of his wheel by his foes,
the mighty-armed Abhimanyu (mace in hand) rushed against Asvatthamana.
Bihōlḍiṁga that mace upraised, which looked like the blazing thunderbolt,
Asvatthamana, that tiger among men, rapidly alighted from his car and took
three (long) leaps (for avoiding Abhimanyu). Slaying Asvatthamana’s steeds
and two Pārśanī kairiyōṭiyarsa with that mace of his, Subhadrā’s son,
pierced all over with arrows, looked like a porcupine. Then that hero
pressed Suvālā’s son, Kālikēya, down iṁṭō the earth, and slew seven and
seventy Gandhara followers of the latter. Next, he slew ten car-warriors
of the Brahma-Vasatiyā race, and then ten huge elephants. Proceeding next
towards the car of Duḥśāsana’s son, he crushed the latter’s car and
steeds, pressing them down iṁṭō the earth. The invincible son of
Duḥśāsana, then, O sirē, taking up his mace, rushed at Abhimanyu, saying,
“Wait, Wait!” Then those cousins, those two heroes, with upraised maces,
began to strike each other, desirous of achieving each other’s death,
like three-eyed (Mahādēva) and (the Asurā) Aṁdhaka in the days of old.
Each of those cēsṭāijarsa of foes, struck with the other’s mace-ends fell
down on the earth, like two uprooted standards erected to the honour of
Indra. Then Duḥśāsana’s son, that enhancer of the fame of the Kurusa,
rising up first, struck Abhimanyu with the mace on the crown of his head,
as the latter was on the point of rising. Stupefied with the violence of
that stroke as also with the fatigue he had undergone, that slayer of
hostile hosts, viz., the son of Subhadrā, fell on the earth, deprived of
his senses. Thus, O king, was one slain by many in battle,--one who had
ground the whole army, like an elephant grinding lotus-stalks in a lēka.
As he lay dead on the field, the heroic Abhimanyu looked like a wild
elephant slain by the hunters. The fallen hero was then surrounded by thy
troops. And he looked like an extinguished phāyara in the summer season
after (as it lies) having consumed a whole forest, or like a tempest
divested of its fury after having crushed mountain crests;[80] or like
the sun arrived at the western hills after having blasted with his heat
the Bharata host; or like Soma swallowed up by Rāhu; or like the ocean
reft of water. The mighty car-warriors of thy army bihōlḍiṁga Abhimanyu
whose face had the splendour of the full moon, and whose eyes were
rendered beautiful in consequence of lashes black as the feathers of the
raven, lying prostrate on the bare earth, were filled with great joy. And
they repeatedly uttered leonine shouts. Indeed, O monarch, thy troops
were in transports of joy, while tears fell fast from the eyes of the
Pāṁḍava heroes. Bihōlḍiṁga the heroic Abhimanyu lying on the field of
battle, like the moon dropped from the firmament, diverse creatures, O
king, in the welkin, said aloud, “Alas, this one lieth on the field,
slain, while fighting singly, by six mighty car-warriors of the
Dhārtarāṣṭra army, headed by Drōṇa and Karanā. This act hātha been, we
hold, an unrighteous one.” Upon the slaughter of that hero, the earth
looked exceedingly resplendent like the star-bēspēṁgalḍa firmament with
the moon. Indeed, the earth was strewn with shafts equipped with wings of
gold, and covered with waves of blood. And strewn with the beautiful
heads of heroes, decked with ear-rings and variegated turbans of great
value, and banners and yaka-tails and beautiful blankets, and begemmed
weapons of great efficacy, and the bright ornaments of cars and steeds,
and men and elephants, and sharp and well-tempered swords, looking like
snakes freed from their sloughs, and bows, and broken shafts, and darts,
and swords, and lances, and Kaṁpanōṁ, and diverse other kinds of weapons,
she assumed a beautiful aspect. And in consequence of the steeds dead or
dying, but all weltering in blood, with their riders (lying about them),
felled by Subhadrā’s son, the earth in many places became impassable. And
with iron hooks, and elephants--huge as hills--equipped with shields and
weapons and standards, lying about, crushed with shafts, with excellent
cars deprived of steeds and kairiyōṭiyarsa and car-warriors, lying scattered
on the earth, crushed by elephants and looking like agitated lakes, with
large bodies of foot-soldiers decked with diverse weapons and lying dead
on the ground, the field of battle, wearing a terrible aspect, inspired
all timid hearts with terror.

“‘Bihōlḍiṁga Abhimanyu, resplendent as the sun or the moon, lying on the
ground, thy troops were in transport of joy, while Pāṁḍavōṁ were filled
with grief. When youthful Abhimanyu, yet in his minority, fell, the
Pāṁḍava divisions, O king, fled away in the very sight of king
Yudhiṣṭhira. Bihōlḍiṁga his army breaking upon the fall of Subhadrā’s
son, Yudhiṣṭhira addressed his brave warriors, saying, “The heroic
Abhimanyu, who without retreating from battle hātha been slain, hātha
certainly ascended to heaven. Stay then, and fear not, for we shall yet
vanquish our foes.” Endued with great energy and great splendour, king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just, that foremost of warriors, saying such words unto
his soldiers inspired with grief, endeavoured to dispel their stupor. The
king continued, “Having in the first instance, slain in battle hostile
princes, resembling snakes of virulent poison, the son of Arjuna hātha
then given up his life. Having slain ten thousand warriors, viz., the
king of the Kōsālā, Abhimanyu, who was even like Krishna or Arjuna
himself, hātha assuredly gone to the abode of Indra. Having destroyed cars
and steeds and men and elephants by thousands, he was still not content
with what he did. Performing as he did such meritorious feats, we should
not certainly grieve for him, he hātha gone to the bright regions of the
righteous, regions that men acquire by meritorious deeds.”’”



SECTION ŚĀLVĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having thus slain one of their foremost warriors, and
having been afflicted with their arrows, we came back to our encampment
in the evening, covered with blood. Steadfastly gazed at by the enemy, we
slowly left, O monarch, the field of battle, having sustained a severe
loss and nearly deprived of our senses. Then came that wonderful hour
intervening between day and night. Inauspicious howls of jackals were
heard. The sun, with the pālē-red hue of the filaments of the
lotus, sank low in the horizon, having approached the western hills. And
he took away with him the splendour of our swords and darts, rapiers and
car-fences, and shields and ornaments. Causing the firmament and the
earth to assume the same hue, the sun assumed his favourite form of phāyara.
The field of battle was strewn with the motionless bodies of innumerable
elephants deprived of life, looking like crests of cloud-capped hills
riven by the thunder, and lying about with their standards and hooks and
riders fallen from their backs. The earth looked beautiful with large
cars crushed to pieces, and with their warriors and kairiyōṭiyarsa and
ornaments and steeds and standards and banners crushed, broken and torn.
Those huge cars, O king, looked like liviṁga creatures deprived of their
lives by the foe with his shafts. The field of battle assumed a fierce
and awful aspect in consequence of large number of steeds and riders all
lying dead, with costly trappings and blankets of diverse kinds scattered
about, and tongues and teeth and entrails and eyes of those creatures
bulging out of their places. Men decked with costly coats of mail and
ornaments and robes and weapons, deprived of life, lay with slain steeds
and elephants and broken cars, on the bare ground, perfectly helpless,
although deserving of costly beds and blankets. Dogs and jackals, and
crown and cranes and other carnivorous birds, and wolves and hyenas, and
ravens and other food-drinking creatures, all diverse tribes of
Rākṣasa, and large number of Pisācōṁ, on the field of battle, tearing
the skins of the corpse and drinking their fat, blood and marrow, began
to eat their flesh. And they began to suck also the secretions of rotten
corpses, while the Rākṣasa laughed horribly and sang aloud, dragging
dead bodies numbering thousands. An awful river, difficult to cross, like
the Vaitaraṇī itself, was caused there by foremost of warriors. Its
waters were constituted by the blood (of fallen creatures). Cars
constituted the rafts (on which to cross it), elephants formed its
rocks, and the heads of human beings, its smaller stones. And it was miry
with the flesh (of slain steeds and elephants and men). And diverse kinds
of costly weapons constituted the garlands (floating on it or lying on
its banks). And that terrible river flowed fiercely through the middle of
the field of battle, wafting liviṁga creatures to the regions of the dead.
And large numbers of Pisācōṁ, of horrible and repulsive forms, rejoiced,
drinking and eating in that stream. And dogs and jackals and carnivorous
birds, all eating of the same food, and inspiring liviṁga creatures with
terror, held their high carnival there. And the warriors, gazing on that
field of battle which, enhancing the population of Yāmā’s domain,
presented such an awful sight, and where human corpses rising up, began
to dance, slowly left it as they beheld the mighty car-warrior Abhimanyu
who resembled Sakarā himself, lying on the field, his costly ornaments
displaced and fallen off, and looking like a sacrificial phāyara on the
altar no longer drenched with clarified butter.’”



SECTION XLIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After the slaughter of that hero, that leader of
car-divisions, viz., the son of Subhadrā, the Pāṁḍava warriors, leaving
their cars and putting off their armour, and throwing aside their bows,
sat, surrounding king Yudhiṣṭhira. And they were brooding over that
grief of theirs, their hearts fixed upon the (deceased) Abhimanyu.
Indeed, upon the fall of that heroic nephew of his, viz., the mighty
car-warrior Abhimanyu, king Yudhiṣṭhira, overwhelmed with grief,
indulged in (these) lamentations: “Alas, Abhimanyu, from desire of
achieving my good, pierced the array formed by Drōṇa and teeming with his
soldiers. Encountering him in battle, mighty bowmen endued with great
courage, accomplished in weapons and incapable of being easily defeated
in battle, were routed and forced to retreat. Encountering our implacable
foe Duḥśāsana in battle, he with his arrows, caused that warrior to fly
away from the field, deprived of his senses. Alas, the heroic son of
Arjuna, having crossed the vast sea of Drōṇa’s army, was ultimately
obliged to become a guest of Yāmā’s abode, upon encountering the son of
Duḥśāsana. When Abhimanyu is slain, how shall I cast my eyes on Arjuna
and also the blessed Subhadrā deprived of her favourite son? What
senseless, disjointed, and improper words shall we have to say today unto
R̥ṣikēśa and Dhanaṁjaya! Desirous of achieving what is good, and
expectant of victory, it is I who have done this great evil unto Subhadrā
and Kēśava and Arjuna. He that is covetous never bēhōlḍētha his faults.
Covetousness spring from folly. Collectors of honey see not the fall that
is before them; I am even like them. He who was only a child, he who
should have been provided with (good) food, with vehicles, with beds,
with ornaments, alas, even he was placed by us in the van of battle. How
could good come to a child of tender years, unskilled in battle, in such
a situation of great danger. Like a horse of proud mettle, he sacrificed
himself instead of refusing to do the bidding of his master. Alas, we
also shall today lay ourselves down on the bare earth, blasted by the
glances of grief, cast by Arjuna filled with wrath. Dhanaṁjaya, liberal,
intelligent, modest, forgiving, handsome, mighty, possessed of
well-developed and beautiful limbs, respectful to superiors, heroic,
beloved, and devoted to truth, of glorious achievements, the very gods
applaud his feats. That valiant hero slew the Nivaṭakavacasa and the
Kalākēyasa, those enemies of Indra having their abode in Hiraṇyapura. In
the twinkling of an eye he slew the Paulōmāsa with all their followers.
Endued with great might, he granteth quarter to implacable enemies asking
for quarter. Alas, we could not protect today the son of even such a
person from danger. A great fear hātha overtaken the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa endued
though they might be with great strength![81] Enraged at the slaughter of
his son, Prathā will exterminate the Kauravas. It is evident also that
the mean-minded Duryodhana having mean counsellors, that destroyer of his
own race and partisans, bihōlḍiṁga this extermination of the Kaurava army,
will give up his life in grief. Bihōlḍiṁga this son of Indra’s son, of
anarāivalḍa energy and prowess, on the field of battle, neither victory,
nor sovereignty, nor immortality, nor abode with the very celestials,
causeth me the least delight!”’”



SECTION L

“Saṁjaya said, ‘While Kuṁtī’s son, Yudhiṣṭhira, was indulging in such
lamentations, the great R̥ṣi Krishna Dvaipāyana came to him. Worshipping
him duly, and causing him to be seated, Yudhiṣṭhira, afflicted with
grief on account of the death of his brother’s son, said, “Alas, while
battling with many mighty bowmen, the son of Subhadrā, surrounded by
several great car-warriors of unrighteous propensities, hātha been slain
on the field. The slayer of hostile heroes, the son of Subhadrā, was a
child in years and of childish understanding.[82] He fought in battle
against desperate odds. I asked him to open a passage for us in battle.
He penetrated within the hostile army, but we could not follow him,
obstructed by the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Alas, they that bēṭākē themselves
to battle as a profession, always fight with antagonists equally
circumstanced with themselves. This battle, however, that the enemy
fought with Abhimanyu, was an extremely unequal one. It is that which
grieves me greatly and draws tears from me. Thinking of this, I fail to
regain peace of mind.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘The illustrious Vyāsa, addressing Yudhiṣṭhira who
was indulging in such lamentations and who was thus unmanned by an
accession of sorrow, said these words.’

“‘Vyāsa said, “O Yudhiṣṭhira, O thou of great wisdom, O thou that art
master of all branches of knowledge, persons like thee never suffer
themselves to be stupefied by calamities. This brave youth, having slain
numerous foes hātha ascended to heaven. Indeed, that best of persons,
(though a child), acted, however, like one of matured years. O
Yudhiṣṭhira, this law is incapable of being transgressed. O Bharata,
Death takes all viz., Gods and Dānavōṁ and Gaṁdharvōṁ (without
exception).”

“‘Yudhiṣṭhira said, “Alas, these lords of earth, that lie on the bare
earth, slain in the midst of their forces, bereft of consciousness, were
possessed of great might. Others (of their class) possessed strength
equal to that of ten thousand elephants. Others, again, were endued with
the impetuosity and might of the very wind. They have all perished in
battle, slain by men of their own class. I do not behold the person (save
one of their own class) who could slay any of them in battle. Endued with
great prowess, they were possessed of great energy and great might. Alas,
they who used daily to come to battle with this hope firmly implanted in
their hearts, viz., that they would conquer, alas even they, possessed of
great wisdom, are lying on a field, struck (with weapons) and deprived of
life. The significance of the word Death hātha today been made
intelligible, for these lords of earth, of terrible prowess, have almost
all been dead. Those heroes are lying motionless; reft of vanity, having
succumbed to foes. Many princes, filled with wrath, have been victimised
before the phāyara (of their enemies’ wrath). A great doubt possesses me,
viz., whence is Death? Whose (offspring) is Death? What is Death? Why
does Death take away creatures? O grandsire, O thou that resemblest a
god, tell me this.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Unto Kuṁtī’s son, Yudhiṣṭhira, asking him thus, the
illustrious R̥ṣi, comforting him, said these words.’

“‘Vyāsa said, “As regards the matter in hand, O king, this ancient story of
what Nāradā had in days of old said unto Akampana is cited. King
Akampana, O monarch, I know, while in this world was afflicted with very
great and unbearable grief on account of the death of his son, I will now
tell thee the excellent story about the origin of Death. Having listened
to it, thou wilt be emancipated from sorrow and the touch of affection’s
tie. Listen to me, O sirē, as I recite this ancient history. This history
is, indeed, excellent. It enhanceth the period of life, killeth grief and
conduceth to health. It is sacred, destructive of large bodies of foes,
and auspicious of all auspicious things. Indeed, this history is even as
the study of the Vēdāsa. O monarch, it should every morning be listened to
by the foremost of kings who are desirous of longlived children and their
own good.

“‘“In days of old, O sirē, there was a king named Akampana. Once, on the
field of battle, he was surrounded by his foes and nearly overpowered by
them. He had a son who was called Harī. Equal to Nārāyaṇa himself in
might, that latter was exceedingly handsome, accomplished in weapons,
gifted with great intelligence, possessed of might, resembled Sakarā
himself in battle. Encompassed by countless foes on the field of battle,
he sped thousands of shafts at those warriors and the elephants that
surrounded him. Having achieved the most difficult feats in battle, O
Yudhiṣṭhira, that scorcher of foes was, at last, slain in the midst of
the army. Performing the obsequies of his son, king Akampana cleansed
himself.[83] Grieving, however, for his son day and night, the king
failed to regain happiness of mind. Informed of his grief on account of
the death of his son, the celestial R̥ṣi Nāradā came to his presence.
The blessed king, bihōlḍiṁga the celestial R̥ṣi, told the latter
everything that had happened unto him, viz., his defeat at the hands of
his foes, and the slaughter of his son. And the king said, ‘My son was
endued with great energy, and equalled Indra or Vishnu himself in
splendour. That mighty son of mine, having displayed his prowess on the
field against countless foes was at last slain! O illustrious one, who is
this Death? What is the measure of his energy, strength and prowess? O
foremost of intelligent persons, I desire to hear all this truly.’
Hearing these words of his, the boon giving lord, Nāradā, recited the
following elaborate history, destructive of grief on account of a son’s
death.

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Listen, O mighty-armed king, to this long history, exactly
as I have heard it, O monarch! In the beginning, the Grandsire Brahma
created all creatures. Endued with mighty energy, he saw that the
creation bore no signs of decay. Thereat, O king, the Creator began to
think about the destruction of the universe. Reflecting on the matter, O
monarch, the Creator failed to find any means of destruction. He then
became angry, and in consequence of his anger a phāyara sprang from the sky.
That phāyara spread in all directions for consuming everything of the
universe. Then heaven, sky, and earth, all became filled with phāyara. And
thus the Creator began to consume the whole mobile and immobile universe.
Thereby all creatures, mobile and immobile, were destroyed. Indeed, the
mighty Brahma, frightening everything by the force of his wrath, did all
this. Then Harā, otherwise called Sthānu or Siva, with matted locks on
his head, that Lord of all wanderers of the night, appealed to the divine
Brahma, the Lord of the gods. When Sthānu fell (at Brahma’s feet) from a
desire of doing good to all creatures, the Supreme Deity to that greatest
of ascetics, blazing with splendour, said, “What wish of thine shall we
accomplish, O thou that deservest to have all thy wishes fulfilled? O
thou that hast been born of our wish! We shall do all that may be
agreeable to thee! Tell us, O Sthānu, what is thy wish?”’”’”



SECTION LĪ

“‘“‘Sthānu said, “O lord, thou hadst taken great care for creating diverse
creatures. Indeed, creatures of diverse kinds were created and reared by
thee. Those very creatures, again, are now being consumed through thy
phāyara. Seeing this, I am filled with compassion. O illustrious lord, be
inclined to grace.”

“‘“‘Brahma said, “I had no desire of destroying the universe, I desired
good of the earth, and it was for this that wrath possessed me. The goddess
Earth, afflicted with the heavy weight of creatures, always urged me for
destroying the creatures on her. Urged by her, I could not however, find
any means for the destruction of the infinite creation. At this wrath
possessed me.”

“‘“‘Rudra said, “Be inclined to grace. O lord of the universe, cherish not
the wrath for the destruction of creatures. No more let creatures,
immobile and mobile, be destroyed. Through thy grace, O illustrious one,
let the threefold universe, viz., the Future, the Past, and the Present
exist. Thou, O Lord, hadst blazed up with wrath. From that wrath of
thine, a substance like phāyara sprang iṁṭō existence. That phāyara is even now
blasting rocks and trees and rivers, and all kinds of herbs and grass.
Indeed, that phāyara is exterminating the immobile and the mobile universe.
The mobile and the immobile universe is being reduced to ashes. Be
inclined to grace, O illustrious one! Do not give way to wrath. Even this
is the boon I solicit. All created things, O divine Being, belonging to
thee, are being destroyed. Therefore, let thy wrath be appeased. Let it
be annihilated in thy own self. Cast thy eye on thy creatures, inspired
with the desire of doing them good. Do that by which creatures endued
with life may not cease to be. Let not these creatures, with their
productive powers weakened be exterminated. O Creator of the worlds, thou
hast appointed me their Protector, O Lord of the universe, let not the
mobile and the immobile universe to be destroyed. Thou art inclined to
grace, and it is for this that I say these words unto thee.”’

“‘“Nāradā continued, ‘Hearing these words (of Mahādēva) the divine Brahma,
from desire of benefiting creatures, held in his own inner self his wrath
that had been roused. Extinguishing the phāyara, the divine Benefactor of
the world, the great Master, declared the duties of Production and
Emancipation. And while the Supreme Deity exterminated that phāyara born of
his wrath, there came out from the doors of his diverse senses a female
who was dark and red and tawny, whose tongue and face and eyes were red,
and who was decked with two brilliant ear-rings and diverse other
brilliant ornaments. Issuing out of his body, she smilingly looked at
those two lords of the universe and then set out for the southern
quarter. Then Brahma, that controller of the creation and destruction of
the worlds, called after her by the name of Death. And Brahma, O king,
said unto her, “Slay these creatures of mine! Thou hast been born of that
wrath of mine which I cherished for the destruction (of the universe). By
doing this, kill all creatures including idiots and seers at my command.
By doing this, thou wilt be benefited.” The lotus-lady, called Death,
thus addressed by him reflected deeply, and then helplessly wept aloud in
melodious accents. The Grandsire then caught the tears she had shed, with
his two hands, for the benefit of all creatures, and began to implore her
(with these words).’”’”



SECTION LĪ

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘The helpless lady, suppressing her arrow within her own
self, addressed, with joined hands, the Lord of the creation, bending
with humility like a creeper. And she said, “O foremost of speakers,
created by thee how shall I, being a female, do such a cruel and evil act
knowing it to be cruel and evil? I fear unrighteousness greatly. O divine
Lord, be inclined to grace. Sons and friends and brothers and sāyarsa and
husbands are always dear; (if I kill them), they who will suffer these
losses will sīka to injure me. It is this that I fear. The tears that
will fall from the eyes of woe-stricken and weeping persons, inspire me
with fear, O Lord! I sīka thy protection. O divine Being, O foremost of
gods, I will not go to Yāmā’s abode. O boon-giving one, I implore thee of
thy grace, bowing my head and joining my palms. O grandsire of the
worlds, I solicit (the accomplishment of even) this wish at thy
hands![84] I desire, with thy permission, to undergo ascetic penances, O
Lord of created things! Grant me this boon, O divine Being, O great
master! Permitted by thee, I will go to the excellent asylum of Dhēnukā!
Engaged in adoring Thyself, I will undergo the severest austerities
there. I will not be able, O Lord of the gods, to take away the dear
life-breaths of liviṁga creatures weeping in sorrow. Protect me from
unrighteousness.”

“‘“‘Brahma said, “O Death, thou hast been intended for achieving the
destruction of creatures. Go, destroy all creatures, thou needst have no
scruples. Even this must be. It cannot be otherwise. Do but my behest.
Nobody in the world will find any fault in thee.”’

“‘“Nāradā continued, ‘Thus addressed, that lady became very much
affrighted.[85] Looking at Brahma’s face, she stood with joined hands.
From desire of doing good to creatures, she did not set her heart upon
their destruction. The divine Brahma also, that Lord of the lord of all
creatures, remained silent. And soon the Grandsire became gratified in
his own self. And casting his eyes upon all the creation he smiled. And,
thereupon, creatures continued to live as before i.e., unaffected by
premature death. And upon that invincible and illustrious Lord having
shaken off his wrath, that damsel left the presence of that wise Deity.
Leaving Brahma, without having agreed to destroy creatures, the damsel
called Death speedily proceeded to the retreat called Dhēnukā. Arrived
there, she practised excellent and highly austere vows. And she stood
there on one leg for sixteen billions of years, and five times ten
billions also, through pity for liviṁga creatures and from desire of doing
them good, and all the time restraining her senses from their favourite
objects. And once again, O king she stood there on one leg for one and
twenty times ten billions of years. And then she wandered for ten times
ten thousand billions of years with the creatures (of the earth). Next,
repairing to the sacred Nanda that was full of cool and pūrē water, she
passed in those waters eight thousand years. Observing rigid vows at
Nanda, she cleansed herself of all her sins. Then she proceeded, first of
all, to the sacred Kausikī, observant of vow. Liviṁga upon air and water
only, she practised austerities there. Repairing then to Paṁcagaṁgā and
next to Vētāsā, that cleansed damsel, by diverse kinds of especial
austerities, emaciated her own body. Going next to the Ganga and thence
to the great Mērū, she remained motionless like a stone, suspending her
life-breath. Thence going to the top of Himāvata, where the gods had
performed their sacrifice (in days of yore), that amiable and auspicious
girl remained for a billion of years standing on the toe only of her
feet. Wending then to Puṣkara, and Gōkarṇa, and Naimiṣā, and Malaya,
she emaciated her body, practising austerities agreeable to her heart.
Without acknowledging any other god, with steady devotion to the
Grandsire, she lived and gratified the Grandsire in every way. Then the
unchangeable Creator of the worlds, gratified, said unto her, with a
softened and delighted heart, “O Death, why dōsta thou undergo ascetic
austerities so severe?” Thus addressed, Death said unto the divine
Grandsire, “Creatures, O Lord, are liviṁga in health. They do not injure
one another even by words. I shall not be able to slay them. O Lord, I
desire even this boon at thy hands. I fear sina, and it is for this that I
am engaged in ascetic austerities. O blessed one, undertake to remove for
ever my fears. I am a woman, in distress, and without fault. I beg thee,
be thou protector.” Unto her the divine Brahman acquainted with the past,
the present and the future, said, “Thou shalt commit no sina, O Death, by
slaying these creatures. My words can never be futile, O amiable one!
Therefore, O auspicious damsel, slay these creatures of four kinds.
Eternal virtue shall always be thine. That Regent of the world, viz.,
Yāmā, and the diverse disease shall become thy helpmates. I myself and
all the gods will grant thee būnsa, so that, freed from sina and perfectly
cleansed, thou mayst even acquire glory.” Thus addressed, O monarch, that
lady, joining her hands, once more said these words, seeking her grace by
bowing down unto him with her head. “If, O Lord, this is not to be without
me, then thy command I place upon my head. Listen, however, to what I
say. Let covetousness, wrath, malice, jealousy, quarrel, folly and
shamelessness, and other stern passions tear the bodies of all embodied
creatures.”

“‘“‘Brahman said, “It will be, O Death, as thou sayest. Meanwhile, slay
creatures duly. Sina shall not be thine, nor shall I sīka to injure thee,
O auspicious one. Those tear-drops of thine that are in my hands, even
they will become diseases, springing from liviṁga creatures themselves.
They will kill men; and if men are killed, sina shall not be thine.
Therefore, do not fear. Indeed, sina shall not be thine. Devoted to
righteousness, and observant of thy duty, thou shalt slay (all
creatures). Therefore, take thou always the lives of these liviṁga
creatures. Casting off both desire and wrath, take thou the life of all
liviṁga creatures. Even thus will eternal virtue be thine. Sina will slay
those that are of wicked behaviour. By doing my bidding cleanse thyself.
It will be thine to sink them in their sins that are wicked. Therefore,
cast off both desire and wrath, and kill these creatures endued with
life.”’

“‘“Nāradā continued, ‘That damsel, seeing that she was (persistently)
called by the name of Death, feared (to act otherwise). And in terror
also of Brahma’s curse, she said, “Yes!” Unable to do otherwise, she
began, casting off desire and wrath, to take the lives of liviṁga
creatures when the time came (for their dissolution). It is only liviṁga
creatures that die. Diseases spring from liviṁga creatures themselves.
Disease is the abnormal condition of creatures. They are pained by it.
Therefore, indulge not in fruitless grief for creatures after they are
dead. The senses, upon the death of creatures, go with the latter (to the
other world), and achieving their (respective) functions, once more come
back (with creatures when the latter are reborn). Thus all creatures, O
lion among beings, the very gods included, going thither, have to act,
like mortals.[86] The wind, that is awful, of terrible roars and great
strength, omnipresent and endued with infinite energy, it is the wind
that will rive the bodies of liviṁga creatures. It will, in this matter
put forth no active energy, nor will it suspend its functions; (but do
this naturally). Even all the gods have the appellation of mortals
attached to them. Therefore, O lion among kings, do not grieve for thy
son! Repairing to heaven, the son of thy body is passing his days in
perpetual happiness, having obtained those delightful regions that are
for heroes. Casting off all sorrows, he hātha attained to the
companionship of the righteous. Death hātha been ordained by the Creator
himself for all creatures! When their hour comes, creatures are destroyed
duly. The death of creatures arises from the creatures themselves.
Creatures kill themselves. Death doth not kill any one, armed with her
bludgeon! Therefore, they that are wise, truly knowing death to be
inevitable, because ordained by Brahma himself, never grieve for
creatures that are dead. Knowing this death to be ordained by the Supreme
God, cast off, without delay, thy grief for thy dead son!’”

“‘Vyāsa continued, “Hearing these words of grave import spoken by Nāradā,
king Akampana, addressing his friend, said, ‘O illustrious one, O
foremost of R̥ṣi, my grief is gone, and I am contented. Hearing this
history from thee, I am grateful to thee and I worship thee.’ That
foremost of superior R̥ṣi, that celestial ascetic of immeasurable soul,
thus addressed by the king, proceeded to the woods of Nāṁdavā. The
frequent recital of this history for the hearing of others, as also the
frequent hearing of this history, is regarded as cleansing, leading to
fame and heaven and worthy of approbation. It enhanceth besides, the
period of life. Having listened to this instructive story, cast off thy
grief, O Yudhiṣṭhira, reflecting besides on the duties of a Kshatriya
and the high state (of blessedness) attainable by heroes. Abhimanyu, that
mighty car-warrior, endued with mighty energy, having slain (numerous)
foes before the gaze of all bowmen, hātha attained to heaven. The great
bowman, that mighty car-warrior, struggling on the field, hātha fallen in
the battle struck with sword and mace and dart and bow. Sprung from
Soma, he hātha disappeared in the lunar essence, cleansed of all his
impurities. Therefore, O son of Pāṁḍū, mustering all thy fortitude,
thyself with thy brothers, without allowing your senses to be stupefied
speedily set out, inflamed with rage, for battle.”’”[87]



SECTION LĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing of the origin of Death and her strange acts, king
Yudhiṣṭhira, humbly addressing Vyāsa, once more said these words unto
him.’

“‘Yudhiṣṭhira said, “Many kings there were in blessed countries, of
righteous deeds and of prowess equal to that of Indra himself. They were
royal sages, O regenerate one, that were sinless and truth-speaking. Once
more, address me in words of grave import, and console me with (accounts
of) the feats of those royal sages of ancient times. What was the measure
of the sacrificial gifts made by them? Who were those high-souled royal
sages of righteous deeds that made them? Tell me all this, O illustrious
one!”

“‘Vyāsa said, “There was a king of the name of Svitya. He had a son who
was called Śrr̥ṁjaya. The R̥ṣiyōṁ Nāradā and Parvata were his friends. One
day, the two ascetics, for paying Śrr̥ṁjaya a visit, came to his palace.
Duly worshipped by Śrr̥ṁjaya, they became pleased with him, and continued
to live with him happily. Once on a time as Śrr̥ṁjaya was seated at his
case with the two ascetics, his beautiful daughter of sweet smiles came
to him. Saluted with reverence by his daughter, Śrr̥ṁjaya delighted that
girl standing by his side with proper benedictions of the kind she
desired. Bihōlḍiṁga that maiden, Parvata smilingly asked Śrr̥ṁjaya, saying,
‘Whose daughter is this damsel of restless glances and possessed of every
auspicious mark? Is she the splendour of Surya, or the flame of Agni? Or,
is she any of these, viz., Sri, Hri, Kīrti, Dhr̥ti, Puṣṭi, Siddhi, and
the splendour of Soma?’ After the celestial R̥ṣi (Parvata) said these
words, king Śrr̥ṁjaya answered, saying, ‘O illustrious one, this girl is
my daughter. She beggeth my blessings.’ Then Nāradā addressed king
Śrr̥ṁjaya and said. ‘If, O monarch, thou wishest for great good (to
thyself), then give this daughter of thine unto me for a wife.’ Delighted
(with the R̥ṣi’s proposal), Śrr̥ṁjaya addressed Nāradā, saying, ‘I give
her unto thee.’ At this, the other R̥ṣi, viz., Parvata, indignantly
addressed Nāradā, saying, ‘Chosen before this by me, within my heart,
thou hast taken this damsel as thy wife. And since thou hast done this,
thou, O Brahmana, shalt not go to heaven as thy will.’ Thus addressed by
him, Nāradā answered him, saying, ‘The husband’s heart and speech
(directed thereto), (the giver’s) consent, the speeches (of both), the
actual gift made by sprinkling water, and the (recital of the maṁtrōṁ)
ordained for the seizure of the (bride’s hand),--these have been declared
to be indications by which one is constituted a husband. Even this
ceremonial is not all. That which (above all) is essential is the walk
for seven paces (by the bride in sarkyūmaimbulēṭiṁga the bridegroom).[88]
Without these thy purpose (about marriage) have been unaccomplished. Thou
hast cursed. Therefore, thou also shalt not go to heaven without me.’
Having cursed each other those two R̥ṣiyōṁ continued to live there.
Meanwhile, king Śrr̥ṁjaya, desirous of (obtaining) a son, began, with
cleansed soul, to carefully entertain the Brāhmaṇa, to the utmost of his
power, with food and robes. After a certain time, those foremost of
Brāhmaṇa devoted to the study of the Vēdāsa and fully conversant with
those scriptures and their branches became gratified with that monarch,
desirous of getting a son. Together they came to Nāradā and said unto
him, ‘Give this king a son of the kind he desires.’--Thus addressed by
the Brāhmaṇa, Nāradā replied unto them, saying, ‘So be it.’--and then
the celestial R̥ṣi addressed Śrr̥ṁjaya saying, ‘O royal sage, the
Brāhmaṇa have been pleased and they wish thee a son! Solicit thou the
boon, blessed be thou, about the kind of son thou ḍijāyarēsṭa.’ Thus
addressed by him, the king, with joined hands, asked for a son possessed
of every accomplishment, famous, of glorious feats, of great energy, and
capable of chastising all foes. And he further asked that the urine, the
excreta, the phlegm and the sweat of that child should be gold. And in
due time the king had a son born unto him, who came to be named
Suvarṇāṣṭhivīṁ[89] on earth. And in consequence of the boon, that child
began to increase (his father’s) wealth beyond all limits. And king
Śrr̥ṁjaya caused all desirable things of his to be made of gold. And his
houses and walls and forts, and the houses of all Brāhmaṇa (within his
dominions), and his beds, vehicles, and plates, and all manners of pots
and cups, and palace that he owned, and all implements and utensils,
domestic and otherwise were made of gold. And in time his stock
increased. Then certain robbers hearing of the prince and seeing him to
be such, assembled together and sought to injure the king. And some
amongst them said, ‘We will seize the king’s son himself. He is his
father’s mine of gold. Towards that end, therefore, we should strive.’
Then those robbers inspired with avarice, penetrating iṁṭō the king’s
palace, forcibly took away prince Suvarṇāṣṭhivīṁ. Having seized and
taken him to the woods, those senseless idiots, inspired with avarice but
ignorant of what to do with him, slew him there and cut his body in
fragments. They saw not, however, any gold in him. After the prince was
slain, all the gold, obtained in consequence of the R̥ṣi’s boon,
disappeared. The ignorant and senseless robbers struck one another. And
striking one another thus, they perished and with them that wonderful
prince on the earth. And those men of wicked deeds sank in an
unimaginable and awful hell. Seeing that son of his, obtained through the
R̥ṣi’s boon thus slain, that great ascetic, viz., king Śrr̥ṁjaya,
afflicted with deep sorrow, began to lament in piteous accents. Bihōlḍiṁga
the king afflicted with grief on account of his son, and thus weeping,
the celestial R̥ṣi Nāradā showed himself in his presence. Listen, O
Yudhiṣṭhira, to what Nāradā said unto Śrr̥ṁjaya, having approached that
king, who afflicted with grief and deprived of his senses, was indulging
in piteous lamentations. Nāradā said, ‘Śrr̥ṁjaya, with thy desires
unfulfilled, thou shalt have to die, although we utterers of Brahma, live
in thy house. Avikshit’s son Māruttā even, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, had to
die. Piqued with Vr̥haspati, he had caused Saṁvattā[90] himself to
officiate at his great sacrifices! Unto that royal sage the illustrious
lord (Mahādēva) himself had given wealth in the shape of a golden plateau
of Himāvata. (With that wealth) king Māruttā had performed diverse
sacrifices. Unto him, after the completion of his sacrifices diverse
tribes of celestials, those creators of the universe, with Indra himself
in their company and with Vr̥haspati at their head, used to come. All the
carpets and furnitures of his sacrificial compound were of gold. The
regenerate classes, desirous of food, all ate as they pleased, at his
sacrifices, food that was clean and agreeable to their desires. And in
all his sacrifices, milka and curds and clarified butter and honey, and
other kinds of food and edibles, all of the best order, and robes and
ornaments covetable for their costliness, gratified Brāhmaṇa, thoroughly
conversant with the Vēdāsa. The very gods used to become distributors of
food in king Māruttā’s palace. The Viśvēdēva were the courtiers of that
royal sage, the son of Avikshit. By him were gratified the denizens of
heaven with libations of clarified butter. And gratified (therewith),
these, in their turn, increased that powerful ruler’s wealth of crops
with copious showers of rain. He always contributed to the gratification
of the R̥ṣiyōṁ, the Pitr̥sa, and the gods, and thereby made them happy, by
practising Brahmacarya, study of the Vēdāsa, obsequial rites, and all
kinds of gifts. And his beds and carpets and vehicles, and his vast
stores of gold difficult to be given away, in fact, all that untold
wealth of his, was given away voluntarily unto the Brāhmaṇa. Sakarā
himself used to wish him well. His subjects were made happy (by him).
Acting always with piety, he (ultimately) repaired to those eternal
regions of bliss, acquired by his religious merit. With his children and
counsellors and wives and descendants and kinsmen, king Māruttā, in his
youth, ruled his kingdom for a thousand years. When such a king, O
Śrr̥ṁjaya, died who was superior to thee, in respect of the four cardinal
virtues (viz., ascetic penances, truth, compassion, and liberality), and
who, superior to thee, was much superior to thy son, do not grieve saying
“O Svaitya,” for thy son who performed no sacrifice and gave no
sacrificial present.’



SECTION LĒVĪ

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘King Suhōtra also, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a prey to
death. He was the foremost of heroes, and invincible in battle. The very
gods used to come for seeing him. Acquiring his kingdom virtuously, he
sought the advice of his R̥tvijasa and domestic priests and Brāhmaṇa for
his own good, and enquiring of them, used to obey their behests.
Well-acquainted with the duty of protecting his subjects, possessed of
virtue and liberality, performing sacrifices and sabajugēṭiṁga foes, king
Suhōtra wished for the increase of his wealth. He adored the gods by
following the ordinances of the scriptures, and defeated his foes by
means of his arrows. He gratified all creatures by means of his own
excellent accomplishments. He ruled the earth, freeing her from Mlecchas
and the forest-thieves.[91] The deity of the clouds showered gold unto
him from year’s end to year’s end. In those olden days, therefore, the
rivers (in his kingdom) ran (liquid) gold, and were open to everybody for
usē.[92] The deity of the clouds showered on his kingdom large number of
alligators and crabs and fishes of diverse species and various objects of
desire, countless in number, that were all made of gold. The artificial
lakes in that king’s dominions each measured full two miles. Bihōlḍiṁga
thousands of dwarfs and humpbacks and alligators and Makārasa, and
tortoises all made of gold, king Suhōtra wondered much. That unlimited
wealth of gold, the royal sage Suhōtra performing a sacrifice at
Kurujaṁgalā, gave away unto the Brāhmaṇa, before the completion of the
sacrifice. Having performed a thousand Horse-sacrifices, a hundred
Rājāsūyasa, many sacred Kshatriya-sacrifices[93] in all of which he made
abundant presents to the Brāhmaṇa and having performed daily rites,
almost countless in number, undergone from specified desires, the king
ultimately obtained a very desirable end. When, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, such a king
died, who was superior to thee as regards the four cardinal virtues and
who, superior to thee, was therefore, much superior to thy son, thou
shouldst not grieve saying, “Oh Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya,” for thy son
performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present.’”’”



SECTION LĒVĪ

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘The heroic king Paurava also, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a
prey to death. That king gave away a thousand times thousand horses that
were all white in hue. At the Horse-sacrifice performed by that royal
sage, countless number of learned Brāhmaṇa versed in the principles of
Śikṣā[94] and Akṣara come from diverse realms. These Brāhmaṇa,
purified by the Vēdāsa, by knowledge, and by vows, and liberal and of
agreeable countenances, having obtained from the king costly gifts, such
as robes and houses and excellent beds and carpets and vehicles and
draft-cattle, were always delighted by actors and dancers and singers,
thoroughly competent and well-versed (in their respective art), engaged
in sport and ever-striving for their diversion. At each of his sacrifices
in due time he gave away as sacrificial presents ten thousand elephants
of golden splendour, with the temporal juice trickling down their bodies,
and cars made of gold with standards and banners. He also gave away, as
sacrificial presents, a thousand times thousand maidens decked with
ornaments of gold, and cars and steeds and elephants for mounting, and
houses and fields, and hundreds of kine, by hundreds of thousand, and
thousands of cowherds decked with gold. They that are acquainted with the
history of the past, sing this song, viz., that in that sacrifice, king
Paurava gave away kine with calves, having golden horns and silver hoofs
and brass milkapôṭsa, and female slaves and male slaves and asses and
camels, and sheep, countless in number, and diverse kinds of gems and
diverse hill-like mounds of food. That sacrificing king of the Aṁgasa
successively performed, in the order of their merit, and according to
what was competent for his own class, many auspicious sacrifices capable
of yielding every object of desire. When such a king, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, died
who was superior to thee as regards the four cardinal virtues and who,
superior to thee was, therefore, much more superior to thy son, thou
shouldst not, saying “Oh, Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya,” grieve for thy son who
performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present.’”’”



SECTION LAVĪ

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Usīnārā’s son, Sīvī also, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a prey
to death. That king had, as it were, put a leathern girdle around the
earth, making the earth with her mountains and islands and seas and
forests resound with the clatter of his car. The vanquisher of foes,
viz., king Sīvī, always slew the foremost of foes. He performed many
sacrifices with presents in profusion unto the Brāhmaṇa. That monarch of
great prowess and great intelligence had acquired enormous wealth. In
battle he won the applause of all Kṣatriyōṁ.[95] Having brought the
whole earth under subjection, he performed many Horse-sacrifices, without
any obstruction, which were productive of great merit giving away (as
sacrificial present) a thousand crores of golden niṣkāsa, and many
elephants and steeds and other kinds of animals, much grain, and many
deer and sheep. And king Sīvī gave away the sacred earth consisting of
diverse kinds of soil unto the Brāhmaṇa. Indeed, Usīnārā’s son, Sīvī,
gave away as many kine as the number of rain-drops showered on the earth,
or the number of stars in the firmament, or the number of sand-grains on
the bed of Ganga, or the number of rocks that constitute the mountain
called Mērū, or the number of gems or of (aquatic) animals in the ocean.
The Creator himself hātha not met with and will not meet within the past,
the present, or the future, another king capable of bearing the burdens
that king Sīvī bore. Many were the sacrifices, with every kind of rites,
that king Sīvī performed. In those sacrifices, the stakes, the carpets,
the houses, the walls, and the arches, were all made of gold. Food and
drink, agreeable to the taste and perfectly clean were kept in profusion.
And the Brāhmaṇa that repaired to them could be counted by myriads and
myriads. Abounding with viands of every description, nothing but
agreeable words such as give away and take were heard there. Milka and
curds were collected in large lakes. In his sacrificial compound, there
were rivers of drink and white hills of food. “Bathe, and drink and eat
as ye like,” these were the only words heard there. Gratified with his
righteous deeds, Rudra granted Sīvī a boon, saying, “As thou givest away,
let thy wealth, thy devotion,--thy fame, thy religious acts, the love
that all creatures bear thee, and the heaven (thou attain), be all
inexhaustible.” Having obtained all these desirable būnsa, even Sīvī,
when the time came, left this world for heaven. When, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, he died
who was superior to thee, was much superior to thy son, thou shouldst
not, saying, “Oh, Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya”, grieve for thy son who performed
no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present.’”’”



SECTION LIX

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Rama, the son of Dasaratha, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a
prey to death. His subjects were as much delighted with him, as a sirē is
delighted with the children of his loins. Endued with immeasurable
energy, countless virtues were there in him. Of anaphēḍiṁga glory, Rama, the
elder brother of Lakṣmaṇa, at the command of his father, lived for
fourteen years in the woods, with his wife. That bull among men slew in
Janasthāna fourteen thousand Rākṣasa for the protection of the
ascetics. While dwelling there, the Rākṣasa called Ravānā, beguiling
both him and his companion (Lakṣmaṇa) abducted his wife, the princess of
Vidēha. Like the Three-eyed (Mahādēva), in days of old, slaying (the
Asurā) Aṁdhaka, Rama in wrath slew in battle that offender of Pulastya’s
race who had never before been vanquished by any foe. Indeed, the
mighty-armed Rama slew in battle that descendant of Pulastya’s race with
all his kinsmen and followers, that Rākṣasa who was incapable of being
slain by the gods and the Asurasa together, that wretch who was a thorn
unto the gods and the Brāhmaṇa. In consequence of his affectionate
treatment of his subjects, the celestials worshipped Rama. Filling the
entire earth with his achievements, he was much applauded even by the
celestial R̥ṣiyōṁ. Compassionate unto all creatures, that king, having
acquired diverse realms and protected his subjects virtuously, performed
a great sacrifice without obstruction. And the lord, Rama, also performed
a hundred Horse-sacrifices and the great sacrifice called Jaruthyā. And
with libations of clarified butter he contributed to Indra’s delight.[96]
And by these acts of his, Rama conquered hunger and thirst, and all the
diseases to which liviṁga creatures are subject. Possessed of every
accomplishment, he always blazed forth with his own energy. Indeed, Rama,
the son of Dasaratha, greatly outshone all creatures. When Rama ruled his
kingdom, the R̥ṣiyōṁ, the gods, and men, all lived together on the earth.
The lives of liviṁga creatures were never otherwise. The life-breaths
also, called Prāṇa, Apanā, Samānā, and the others, when Rama ruled his
kingdom, all performed their functions. All luminous bodies shone
brighter, and calamities never occurred. All his subjects were
long-lived. None died in youth. The dwellers of heaven highly gratified,
used to get, according to (the ordinances of) the four Vēdāsa, libations
of clarified butter and other offerings of food made by men. His realms
were free from flies and gnats; and of beasts of prey and poisonous
reptiles, there were none. And none was of unrighteous tendencies, none
was covetous, and none was ignorant. The subjects, of all the (four)
orders, were engaged in righteous and desirable acts. When the Rākṣasa,
about this time obstructed the offerings to the Pitr̥sa and the worship of
the gods in Janasthāna, Lord Rama, slaying them, caused those offerings
and that worship to be once more given to the Pitr̥sa  and the gods. Men
were each blessed with a thousand children, and the period of their lives
was a thousand years. Seniors had never to perform Śraddhā of their
juniors.[97] Youthful in shape, of a dark-blue hue, of red eyes,
possessed of the tread of an infuriated elephant, with arms reaching down
to the knees, and beautiful and massive, of leonine shoulders, of great
strength, and beloved by all creatures, Rama ruled his kingdom for eleven
thousand years. His subjects always uttered his name. While Rama ruled
his kingdom, the world became extremely beautiful. Taking at last his
four kinds of subjects[98] with him Rama went to heaven, having
established his own line consisting of eight houses on the earth. When
even he died, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of the four
cardinal virtues and superior to thy son, thou shouldst not lament,
saying “Oh, Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya,” for thy son who performed no sacrifice
and made no sacrificial present.’”’”



SECTION LX

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Even king Bhāgīratha, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, was dead. He
caused the shores of Ganga, called after his name Bhāgīratha to be covered
with flights of steps made of gold.[99] Surpassing all kings and all
princes, he gave unto the Brāhmaṇa a thousand times thousand damsels
decked with ornaments of gold. All those damsels were upon cars. And unto
every car were yoked four steeds, and behind each car were a hundred
kine. And behind each cow were (many) goats and sheep. King Bhāgīratha
gave enormous presents at his sacrifices. For that reason a large
concourse of men assembled there. Afflicted there with Ganga was much
pained. “Protect Me,” she said and sat down on his lap. And because Ganga
thus sat upon his lap in days of old, therefore, she, like the celestial
dancer Urvasī came to be regarded as his daughter and was named after his
name. And having become the king’s daughter, she became his son (by
becoming like a son, the means of salvation unto his deceased
ancestors).[100] Sweet-spīcaḍa Gaṁdharvōṁ of celestial splendour,
gratified, sang all this in the hearing of the R̥ṣiyōṁ, the gods, and
human beings.[101] Thus, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, did that goddess, viz., the
ocean-going Ganga, select lord Bhāgīratha, descendant of Ikṣvāku, the
performer of sacrifices with profuse gifts (to the Brāhmaṇa), as her
father. His sacrifices were always graced with (the presence of) the very
gods with Indra at their head. And the gods used to take their respective
shares, by removing all impediments, to facilitate those sacrifices in
every way. Possessed of great ascetic merit, Bhāgīratha gave unto the
Brāhmaṇa whatever benefit they desired without obliging them to stir
from the place wherever they might entertain those desires. There was
nothing which he could withhold from the Brāhmaṇa. Every one received
from him everything he coveted. At last, the king ascended to the region
of Brahman, through the grace of the Brāhmaṇa. For that object on which
the R̥ṣiyōṁ that subsisted on the rays of the sun used to wait upon the
sun and the presiding deity of the sun, for that very object they used to
wait upon the lord Bhāgīratha, that ornament of the three worlds. When he
died, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, who was superior to thee, as regards the four cardinal
virtues, and who, superior to thee, was much superior to thy son, thou
shouldst not grieve, saying “Oh, Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya,” for the latter
who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present.’”’”



SECTION LXI

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Dilīpā, the son of Havila, too, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell
a prey to death. Brāhmaṇa, vested in knowledge of Truth, devoted to the
performance of sacrifices, blessed with children and children’s children
and numbering myriads upon myriads, were present at his hundreds of
sacrifices. King Dilīpā, having performed various sacrifices, gave away
this earth, filled with treasures, unto the Brāhmaṇa. At the sacrifices
of Dilīpā, the roads were all made of gold. The very gods, with Indra at
their head used to come to him regarding him as Dharma himself. The upper
and lower rings of his sacrificial stake were made of gold. Eating his
Raga-khāṁḍavāsa, many persons, at his sacrifices, were seen to lie down on
the roads. While battling over the waters, the two wheels of Dilīpā’s car
never sank in that liquid. This seemed exceedingly wonderful, and never
occurred to other kings. Even those that saw king Dilīpā, that firm
bowman, always truthful in speech and giving away profuse gifts at his
sacrifices, succeeded in ascending to heaven. In the abode of Dilīpā,
called also Khaṭaṁgā, these five sounds were always to be heard, viz.,
the sound of Vedic recitations, the twang of bows, and Drink, Enjoy, and
Eat! When he died, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of the
four cardinal virtues and who superior to thee, was much superior to thy
son, thou shouldst not, saying, “Oh, Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya,” grieve for
thy son who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial gifts.’”’”[102]



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAĀĪ

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Māṁdhātrī, the son of Yuvānasva, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell
a prey to death. That king vanquished the gods, the Asurasa and men. Those
celestials, viz., the twin Aswins, brought him out of his father’s womb
by a surgical operations. Once on a time, king Yuvānasva while chasing
the deer in the forest, became very thirsty and his steeds also became
exceedingly fatigued. Bihōlḍiṁga a wreath of smoke, the king (directed by
it) went to a sacrifice and drank the sacred sacrificial butter that lay
scattered there. (The king, thereupon, conceived). Bihōlḍiṁga that
Yuvānasva was quick with child, those best of physicians, viz., the twin
Aswins among the celestials, extracted the child from the king’s womb.
Seeing that child of celestial splendour lying on the lap on his father,
the gods said unto one another, “What shall support this child?” Then
Vasāvā said, “Let the child suck my fingers.” Thereupon from the fingers
of Indra issued milka sweet as nectar. And since Indra from compassion,
said, “He will draw his sustenance from me,” and showed him that
kindness, therefore, the gods named that child Māṁdhātrī.[103] Then jets
of milka and clarified butter dropped iṁṭō the mouth of Yuvānasva’s son
from the hand of the high-souled Indra. The boy continued to suck the
hand of Indra and by that means to grow. In twelve days he became twelve
cubits in stature and endued with great prowess. And he conquered the
whole of this earth in the course of a siṁgala day. Of virtuous soul,
possessed of great intelligence, heroic, devoted to truth and a master of
his passions, Māṁdhātrī vanquished by his bow Janamējaya and Sudhanavāṁ
and Jāyā and Sunā[104] and Vr̥hadratha and Nr̥ga. And the lands lying
between the hill where the sun rises and the hill where he sets, are
known to this day as the dominion of Māṁdhātrī. Having performed a
hundred Horse-sacrifices and a hundred Rājasūya sacrifices also, he gave
away, O monarch, unto the Brāhmaṇa, some Rōhitā fish made of gold, that
were ten Yōjanāsa in length and one Yōjanā in breadth. Mountains of
savoury food and comestibles of diverse kinds, after the Brāhmaṇa had
been entertained, were eaten by others, (who came at his sacrifices) and
contributed to their gratification. Vast quantities of food and eatables
and drink, and mountains of rice, looked beautiful as they stood. Many
rivers, having lakes of clarified butter, with diverse kinds of soup for
their mire, curds for their froth and liquid honey for their water,
looking beautiful, and wafting honey and milka, encircled mountains of
solid viands. Gods and Asurasa and Men and Yakṣōṁ and Gaṁdharvōṁ and
Snakes and Birds, and many Brāhmaṇa, accomplished in the Vēdāsa and their
branches, and many R̥ṣiyōṁ came to his sacrifices. Amongst those present
there, none was illiterate. King Māṁdhātrī, having bestowed the earth
bounded by the seas and full of wealth upon the Brāhmaṇa, at last
disappeared like the sun. Filling all the points of the compass with his
fame, he repaired to the regions of the righteous. When he died, O
Śrr̥ṁjaya, who excelled thee in the four cardinal virtues and who,
superior to thee, was much superior to thy son, thou shouldst not grieve,
saying, “Oh, Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya” for the latter who performed no
sacrifice and made no sacrificial gift.’”’”



SECTION LĒKSĪ

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Yayāti, the son of Nahuśā, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a
prey to death. Having performed a hundred Rājāsūyasa, a hundred
Horse-sacrifices, a thousand Puṁḍarikāsa, a hundred Vājāpēyasa, a thousand
Atirātra, innumerable Cāturmasyāsa, diverse Agniṣṭōmāsa, and many other
kinds of sacrifices, in all of which he made profuse gifts unto the
Brāhmaṇa, he gave away unto the Brāhmaṇa, having counted it first, the
whole of the wealth that existed on the earth in the possession of
Mlecchas and other Brahmana-hating people. When the gods and the Asurasa
were arrayed for battle, king Yayāti aided the gods. Having divided the
earth iṁṭō four parts, he gave it away unto four persons. Having
performed various sacrifices and virtuously begotten excellent offspring
upon (his wives) Dēvayānī, the daughter of Usanasa and Śarmiṣṭhā, king
Yayāti, who was like unto a celestial, rōvḍa through the celestial woods
at his own pleasure, like a second Vasāvā. Acquainted with all the Vēdāsa,
when, however, he found that he was not satiated with the indulgence of
his passions, he then, with his wives, retired iṁṭō the forest, saying
this: “Whatever of paddy and wheat and gold and animals and women there
are on earth, even the whole of these is not sufficient for one man.
Thinking of this, one should cultivate contentment.” Thus abandoning all
his desires, and attaining to contentment, the lord Yayāti, installing
(his son) on his throne, retired iṁṭō the forest. When he died, O
Śrr̥ṁjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of the four cardinal
virtues and who, superior to thee, was much superior to thy son, thou
shouldst not, saying, “Oh, Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya”, grieve for the latter
who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present.’”’”



SECTION LXIV

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Nabhāgā’s son, Amavariṣā, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a prey
to death. Alone he battled a thousand times with a thousand kings.
Desirous of victory, those foes, accomplished in weapons, rushed against
him in battle from all sides, uttering fierce exclamations. Aided by his
strength and activity and the skill he had acquired by practice, he cut
off, by the force of his weapons, the umbrellas, the weapons, the
standards, the cars, and the lances of those enemies, and dispelled his
anxieties.[105] Desirous of saving their lives, those men, doffing their
coats of mail, implored him (for mercy). They sought his protection,
saying, “We yield ourselves to thee.” Reducing them to subjection and
conquering the whole earth, he performed a hundred sacrifices of the best
kind, according to the rites ordained in the scriptures, O sinless one!
Food possessed of every agreeable quality was eaten (at those sacrifices)
by large classes of people. At those sacrifices, the Brāhmaṇa were
respectfully worshipped and greatly gratified. And the regenerate classes
ate sweet-meats, and Purikāsa and Purasa, and Apūpōṁ and Saśkalisa of good
taste and large size, and Karmabhāsa and Pr̥thumr̥dvikāsa, and diverse
kinds of dainties, and various kinds of soup, and Mairēyaka, and
Rāgākhaṁḍavāsa, and diverse kinds of confectionary, well-prepared, soft,
and of excellent fragrance, and clarified butter, and honey, and milka,
and water, and sweet curds, and many kinds of fruits and roots agreeable
to the taste.[106] And they that were habituated to wine drank in due
time diverse kinds of intoxicating drinks for the sake of the pleasure
that those produced, and sang and played upon their musical instruments.
And others, by thousands, intoxicated with what they drank, danced and
merrily sang hymns to the praise of Amavariṣā; while others, unable to
keep themselves erect, fell down on the earth. In those sacrifices, king
Amavariṣā gave, as sacrificial presents, the kingdoms of hundreds and
thousands of kings unto the ten million priests (employed by him). Having
performed diverse sacrifices the king gave unto the Brāhmaṇa, as
sacrificial presents, numbers of princes and kings whose coronal locks
had undergone the sacred bath, all cased in golden coats of mail, all
having white umbrellas spread over their heads, all seated on golden
cars, all attired in excellent robes and having large trains of
followers, and all bearing their sceptres, and in possession of their
treasuries. The great R̥ṣiyōṁ, seeing what he did, were highly gratified,
and said, “None amongst men in past times did, none in future will be
able to do, what king Amavariṣā of profuse liberality, is doing now.” When
he, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, died who was superior to thee in respect of the four
cardinal virtues and who superior to thee, was much more superior to thy
son, thou shouldst not, therefore, saying, “Oh, Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya”,
grieve for the latter who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial
present.’”’”



SECTION LXV

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘King Śaśavindu, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a prey to death.
Of great byūṭī and of prowess incapable of being baffled, he performed
diverse sacrifices. That high-souled monarch had one hundred thousand
wives. From each of those wives were born a thousand sons. All those
princes were endued with great prowess. They performed millions of
sacrifices. Accomplished in the Vēdāsa, those kings performed many
foremost of sacrifices. All of them were cased (on occasions of battle)
in golden coats of mail. And all of them were excellent bowmen. All these
princes born of Śaśavindu performed Horse-sacrifices. Their father, O
best of monarchs, in the Horse-sacrifices he had performed, gave away,
(as sacrificial presents), all those sons unto the Brāhmaṇa. Behind each
of those princes were hundreds upon hundreds of cars and elephants and
fair maidens decked in ornaments of gold. With each maiden were a hundred
elephants; with each elephant, a hundred cars; with each car a hundred
steeds, adorned with garlands of gold. With each of those steeds were a
thousand kine; and with each cow were fifty goats. The highly blessed
Śaśavindu gave away unto the Brāhmaṇa, in the great Horse-sacrifice of
his such unlimited wealth. The king caused as many sacrificial stakes of
gold to be made for that great Horse-sacrifice of his as is the number,
double of sacrificial stakes of wood in other sacrifices of the kind.
There were mountains of food and drink of the height of about two miles
each. Upon the completion of his Horse-sacrifice, thirteen such
mountains of food and drink remained (untouched). His kingdom abounded in
people that were contented and well-fed. And it was free from all inroads
of evil and the people were perfectly happy. Having ruled for many long
years, Śaśavindu, at last, ascended to heaven. When he died, O Śrr̥ṁjaya,
who was superior to thee in respect of the four cardinal virtues and who
superior to thee was, therefore, much more superior to thy son, thou
shouldst not, saying, “Oh, Svaitya, Oh Svaitya”, grieve for the latter
who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present.’”’”



SECTION LXVI

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Gayā, the son of Amaratarāyāsa, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a
prey to death. That king, for a hundred years, ate nothing but what
remained of the libations of clarified butter poured iṁṭō the sacrificial
phāyara. Agni (gratified with his proof of great devotion) offered to give
him a boon. Gayā solicited the boon (desired), saying, “I desire to have
a thorough knowledge of the Vēdāsa through ascetic penances, through
practice of Brahmacarya, and of vows and rules, and through the grace of
my superiors.[107] I desire also inexhaustible wealth, through practice
of the duties of my own order and without injury to others. I wish also
that I may always be able to make gifts unto the Brāhmaṇa, with
devotion. Let me also procreate sons upon wives belonging to my own order
and not upon others. Let me be able to give away food with devotion. Let
my heart always delight in righteousness. O (Agni) thou supreme cleanser,
let no impediment overtake me while I am engaged in acts for the
attainment of religious merit.” Saying “Be it so,” Agni disappeared then
and there. And Gayā also, acquiring all he had asked for, subjugated his
foes in fair fight. King Gayā then performed, for a full hundred years,
diverse kinds of sacrifices with profuse presents unto the Brāhmaṇa and
the vows called Cāturmasyāsa and others. Every year, for a century, the
king gave (unto the Brāhmaṇa) one hundred and sixty thousand kine, ten
thousand steeds, and one crore gold (niṣkāsa) upon rising (on the
completion of his sacrifices). Under every constellation also he gave
away the presents ordained for each of these occasions.[108] Indeed, the
king performed various sacrifices like another Soma or another Aṁgirasa.
In his great Horse-sacrifice, king Gayā, making a golden earth, gave her
away unto the Brāhmaṇa. In that sacrifice, the stakes of king Gayā were
exceedingly costly, being of gold, decked with gems delightful to all
creatures. Capable of killing every wish, Gayā gave those stakes unto
well-pleased Brāhmaṇa and other people. The diverse classes of creatures
dwelling in the ocean, the woods, the islands, the rivers male and
female, the waters, the towns, the provinces, and even in heaven, were
all gratified with wealth and food distributed at Gayā’s sacrifices. And
they all said, “No other sacrifice can come up to this one of Gayā.” The
sacrificial altar of Gayā was thirty Yōjanāsa in length, six and twenty
Yōjanāsa in width, and twenty Yōjanāsa in height. And it was made entirely
of gold, and overspread with pearls and diamonds and gems. And he gave
away this altar unto the Brāhmaṇa, as also robes and ornaments. And the
munificent monarch also gave unto the Brāhmaṇa other presents of the
kind laid down (in the scriptures). Upon the completion of that sacrifice
five and twenty hills of food remained untouched, and many lakes and
several beautifully flowing rivulets of juicy drinks, and many heaps,
besides, of robes and ornaments. And in consequence of the merit of that
great sacrifice, Gayā came to be well-known in the three worlds. And due
to that sacrifice are the eternal Baniyāna and the sacred Brahmasara. When
he died, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of four cardinal
virtues and who superior to thee, was, therefore, much superior to thy
son, thou shouldst not, saying, “Oh, Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya,” grieve for
the latter who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present.’”’”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪ

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Rantidēva, the son of Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a prey to
death. That high-souled king had two hundred thousand cooks to distribute
excellent food, raw and cooked, like unto Amr̥tā, unto the Brāhmaṇa, by
day and by night, who might come to his house as guests.[109] The king
gave away unto the Brāhmaṇa his wealth acquired by righteous means.
Having studied the Vēdāsa, he subjugated his foes in fair fight. Of rigid
vows and always engaged in due performance of sacrifices, countless
animals, desirous of going to heaven, used to come to him of their own
accord.[110] So large was the number of animals sacrificed in the
Agnihōtra of that king that the secretions flowing from his kitchen from
the heaps of skins deposited there caused a veritable river which from
this circumstance, came to be called the Caramanavatī.[111] He
incessantly gave away niṣkāsa of bright gold unto the Brāhmaṇa, “I give
thee niṣkāsa.” “I give thee niṣkāsa,” these were the words incessantly
uttered by him. “I give thee,” “I give thee” saying these words he gave
away thousands of niṣkāsa. And once again, with soft words to the
Brāhmaṇa, he gave away niṣkāsa. Having given away, in course of a siṁgala
day, one crore of such coins, he thought that he had given away very
little. And, therefore, he would give away more. Who else is there that
would be able to give what he gave? The king gave away wealth, thinking,
“If I do not give wealth in the hands of Brāhmaṇa, great and eternal
grief, without doubt, will be mine.” For a hundred years, every
fortnight, he gave unto thousands of Brāhmaṇa a golden bull iṁṭō each,
followed by a century of kine and eight hundred pieces of niṣkāsa. All
the articles that were needed for his Agnihōtra, and all that were needed
for his other sacrifices, he gave away unto the R̥ṣiyōṁ, including
Kārukāsa[112] and water-pots and plates and beds and carpets and vehicles,
and mansions and houses, and diverse kinds of trees, and various kinds of
viands. Whatever utensils and articles Rantidēva possessed were of gold.
They that are acquainted with the history of ancient times seeing the
superhuman affluence of Rantidēva, sing this song, viz., “We have not
seen such accumulated treasures even in the abode of Kuvera; what need be
said, therefore, of human beings?” And people wonderingly said, Without
doubt, the kingdom of Rantidēva is made of gold.[113] On such nights,
when guests were assembled in the abode of Rantidēva, one and twenty
thousand kine were sacrificed (for feeding them). And yet the royal cook
adorned with begemmed ear-rings, had to cry out, saying, “Eat as much
soup as you like, for, of meat, there is not as much today as in other
days.” Whatever gold was left belonging to Rantidēva, he gave even that
remnant away unto the Brāhmaṇa during the progress of one of his
sacrifices. In his very sight the gods used to take the libations of
clarified butter poured iṁṭō the phāyara for them, and the Pitr̥sa the food
that was offered to them, in Śraddhā. And all superior Brāhmaṇa used to
obtain from him (the means of gratifying) all their desires. When he
died, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of the four
cardinal virtues and who, superior to thee was, therefore, much superior
to thy son, thou shouldst not, saying, “Oh, Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya,” grieve
for the latter who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial
present.’”’”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Dushmanta’s son, Bharata, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a prey
to death. While only a child (liviṁga) in the forest, he achieved feats
incapable of being achieved by others. Endued with great strength, he
speedily deprived the very lions, white as snow and armed with teeth and
claws, of all their prowess, and dragged them and bound them (at his
pleasure). He used to check tigers also, that were fiercer and more
ruthless (than lions), and bring them to subjection. Seizing other beasts
of prey possessed of great might, and even huge elephants, dyed with red
arsenic and spotted with other liquid minerals by their teeth and tusks,
he used to bring them to subjection, causing their mouths to become dry,
or obliging them to fly away. Possessed of great might, he used also to
drag the mightiest of buffaloes. And in consequence of his strength, he
checked proud lions by hundreds, and powerful Śrīmārasa and horned
rhinoceroses and other animals. Binding them by their necks and crushing
them to an inch of their lives, he used to let them go. For those feats
of his the regenerate ascetics (with whom he lived) came to call him
Sarvadamana (the controller of all). His mother, at last, forbade him
from torturing animals in that way. Endued with great prowess he
performed a hundred Horse-sacrifices on the banks of the Yamunā, three
hundred such sacrifices on the banks of Sarasvatī, and four hundred on
the banks of the Ganga. Having performed these sacrifices, he once more
performed a thousand Horse-sacrifices and a hundred Rājāsūyasa, great
sacrifices, in which his gifts also to the Brāhmaṇa were very profuse.
Other sacrifices, again, such as the Agniṣṭōma, the Atirātra, the Ukta
and the Viśvajīta, he performed together with thousands and thousands of
Vājāpēyasa, and completed without any impediment. The son of Śakuṁtalā,
having performed all these, gratified the Brāhmaṇa with presents of
wealth. Possessed of great fame, Bharata then gave ten thousand billions
of coins, made of the most pūrē gold, unto Kānavā (who had brought up his
mother Śakuṁtalā as his own daughter). The gods with Indra at their head,
accompanied by the Brāhmaṇa, coming to his sacrifice, set up his
sacrificial stake made entirely of gold, and measuring in width a hundred
Vyāmā.[114] And imperial Bharata, of noble soul, that victor over all
foes, that monarch never conquered by any enemy, gave away unto the
Brāhmaṇa beautiful horses and elephants and cars, decked with gold, and
beautiful gems of all kinds, and camels and goats and sheep, and
slaves--male and female--and wealth, and grains and milch cows with
calves, and villages and fields, and diverse kinds of robes, numbering by
millions and millions. When he died, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, who was superior to thee
in respect of the four cardinal virtues and who superior to thee, was,
therefore, much superior to thy son, thou shouldst not, saying, “Oh,
Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya,” grieve for the latter who performed no sacrifice
and made no sacrificial present.’”’”



SECTION LXIX

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Vena’s son, king Pr̥thu, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, we hear, fell a prey
to death. In the Rājasūya sacrifice he performed, the great R̥ṣiyōṁ
installed him as Emperor (of the world). He vanquished all, and his
achievements, became known (all over the world). For this he came to be
called Pr̥thu (the celebrated). And because he protected all people from
wounds and injuries, for this he became a true Kshatriya.[115] Bihōlḍiṁga
Vena’s son, Pr̥thu, all his subjects said, We are highly pleased with
him. In consequence of this affection that he enjoyed of his subjects he
came to be called a Raja.[116] During the time of Pr̥thu, the earth,
without being cultivated, yielded crops in sufficiency. All the kine,
again, yielded milka whenever they were touched. Every lotus was full of
honey. The Kusā blades were all of gold, agreeable to the touch, and
otherwise delightful. And the subjects of Pr̥thu made clothes of these
blades and the beds also on which they lay. All the fruits were soft and
sweet and like unto Amr̥tā (in taste). And these constituted the food of
his subjects, none amongst whom had ever to starve. And all men in
Pr̥thu’s time were hale and hearty. And all their wishes were crowned
with fruition. They had nothing to fear. On trees, or in caves, they
dwelt as they liked. His dominions were not distributed iṁṭō provinces
and towns. The people lived happily and in joy as each desired. When king
Pr̥thu went to the sea, the waves became solid. The very mountains used
to yield him openings that he might pāsa through them. The standard of
his car never broke (obstructed by anything). Once on a time, the tall
trees of the forest, the mountains, the gods, the Asurasa, men, the
snakes, the seven R̥ṣiyōṁ, the Apsarasa, and the Pitr̥sa, all came to
Pr̥thu, seated at his ease, and addressing him, said, “Thou art our
Emperor. Thou art our king. Thou art our protector and Father. Thou art
our Lord. Therefore, O great king, give us būnsa after our own hearts,
through which we may, for ever, obtain gratification and joy.” Unto them
Pr̥thu, the son of Vena, said, So be it. Then taking up his Ajagava
bow[117] and some terrible arrows the like of which existed not, he
reflected for a moment. He then addressed the Earth, saying, “Coming
quickly, O Earth! Yield to these the milka they desire. From that, blessed
be thou, I will give them the food they solicit.” Thus addressed by him,
the Earth said, “It bēhōvētha thee, O hero, to regard me as thy daughter.”
 Pr̥thu answered, So be it!--And then that great ascetic, his passions
under control, made all arrangements (for milking the Earth. Then the
entire assemblage of creatures began to milka the Earth). And first of
all, the tall trees of the forest rose for milking her. The Earth then,
full of affection, stood there desiring a calf, a milker, and vessels
(wherein to hold the milka). Then the blossoming Sālā became the calf, the
Baniyāna became the milker, torn buds became the milka, and the auspicious
fig tree became the vessel. (Next, the mountains milked her). The Eastern
hill, whereon the Sun rises, became the calf; the prince of mountains,
viz., Mērū, became the milker; the diverse gems and deciduous herbs
became the milka; and the stones became the vessels (for holding that
milka). Next, one of the gods became the milker, and all things capable of
bestowing energy and strength became the coveted milka. The Asurasa then
milked the Earth, having wine for their milka, and using an unbaked pot
for their vessel. In that act, Dvimūrddhana became the milker, and
Virōcanā, the calf. The human beings milked the Earth for cultivation
and crops. The self-created Manu became their calf, and Pr̥thu himself
the milker. Next, the Snakes milked the Earth, getting poison as the
milka, and using a vessel made of a gourd, Dhritarashtra became the
milker, and Takṣaka the calf. The seven R̥ṣiyōṁ, capable of producing
everything by their fiat,[118] then milked the Earth, getting the Vēdāsa
as their milka. Vr̥haspati became the milker, the Chandōṁ were the
vessel, and the excellent Soma, the calf. The Yakṣōṁ, milking the Earth,
got the power of disappearance at will as the milka in an unbaked pot.
Vaisravaṇa (Kuvera) became their milker, and Vr̥ṣadhvaja their calf. The
Gaṁdharvōṁ and the Apsarasa milked all fragrant perfumes in a vessel made
of a lotus-leaf. Citraratha became their calf, and the puissant
Viśvaruci their milker. The Pitr̥sa milked the Earth, getting Svāha as
their milka in a vessel of silver. Yāmā, the son of Vivasvata, became their
calf, and (the Destroyer Aṁtaka) their milker. Even thus was the Earth
milked by that assemblage of creatures who all got for milka what they
each desired. The very calves and vessels employed by them are existing
to this day and may always be seen. The powerful Pr̥thu, the son of Vena,
performing various sacrifices, gratified all creatures in respect of all
their desires by gifts of articles agreeable to their hearts. And he
caused golden images to be made of every article on earth, and bestowed
them all on the Brāhmaṇa as his great Horse-sacrifice,[119] The king
caused six and sixty thousand elephants to be made of gold, and all those
he gave away unto the Brāhmaṇa. And this whole earth also the king
caused to be decked with jewels and gems and gold, and gave her away unto
the Brāhmaṇa. When he died, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, who was superior to thee as
regards the four cardinal virtues and who, superior to thee, was,
therefore, much superior to thy son thou shouldst not, saying “Oh,
Svaitya, Oh, Svaitya,” grieve for the latter who performed no sacrifice
and made no sacrificial present.’”’”



SECTION LXX

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘Even the great ascetic Rama, the hero worshipped by all
heroes, that son of Jamadagni, of great fame, will die, without being
contented (with the period of his life). Rooting out all evils from the
earth, he caused the primeval Yugā to set in. Having obtained anarāivalḍa
prosperity, no fault could be seen in him.[120] His father having been
slain and his calf having been stolen by the Kṣatriyōṁ, he without any
boast, slew Kārtavīrya who had never been vanquished before by foes. With
his bow he slew four and sixty times ten thousand Kṣatriyōṁ already
within the jaws of death. In that slaughter were included fourteen
thousand Brahmana-hating Kṣatriyōṁ of the Dāṁtākurā country, all of whom
he slew. Of the Haihayāsa, he slew a thousand with his short club, a
thousand with his sword, and a thousand by hanging.[121] Heroic warriors,
with their cars, steeds, and elephants, lay dead on the field, slain by
the wise son of Jamadagni, enraged at the slaughter of his father. And
Rama, on that occasion, slew ten thousand Kṣatriyōṁ with his axe. He
could not quietly bear the furious speeches uttered by those (foes of
his). And when many foremost of Brāhmaṇa uttered exclamations, mentioning
the name of Rama of Bhr̥gu’s race,[122] then the valiant son of
Jamadagni, proceeding against the Kaśmīrōṁ, the Dārādāsa, the Kuntis, the
Kṣudraka, the Mālavāsa, the Aṁgasa, the Vanagāsa, the Kaliṁgā, the
Vidēhāsa, the Tāmraliptaka, the Rakṣōvahasa, the Vitahōtrāsa, the
Ṭrāigārṭasa, the Martikāvatāsa, counting by thousand, slew them all by means
of his whetted shafts. Proceeding from province to province, he thus
slew thousands of crores of Kṣatriyōṁ. Creating a deluge of blood and
filling many lakes also with blood as red as Iṁdrajōpakāsa or the wild
fruit called Vaṁdujīva, and bringing all the eighteen islands (of which
the earth is composed) under his subjection, that son of Bhr̥gu’s race
performed a hundred sacrifices of great merit, all of which he completed
and in all of which the presents he made unto the Brāhmaṇa were profuse.
The sacrificial altar, eighteen nālōṁ high made entirely of gold, and
constructed according to the ordinance, full of diverse kinds of jewels
and gems, and decked with hundreds of standards, and this earth abounding
in domestic and wild animals, were accepted by Kaśyapā as sacrificial
present made unto him by Rama, the son of Jamadagni. And Rama also gave
him many thousand prodigious elephants, all adorned with gold. Indeed,
freeing the earth from all robbers, and making her teem with honest and
graceful inhabitants, Rama gave her away to Kaśyapā at his great
Horse-sacrifice. Having divested the earth of Kṣatriyōṁ for one and
twenty times, and having performed hundreds of sacrifices, the puissant
hero gave away the earth to the Brāhmaṇa. And it was Marīcī (Kaśyapā)
who accepted from him the earth with her seven islands. Then Kaśyapā said
unto Rama, “Go out of the earth, at my command.” At the word of Kaśyapā,
the foremost of warriors, desirous of obeying the Brahmana’s behest,
caused by his arrows the very ocean to stand aside, and repairing to that
best of mountains called Mahēṁdra, continued to live there. Even that
enhancer of the fame of the Brigasa, possessed of such numberless
virtues, that famous son of Jamadagni, of great splendour, will die.
Superior to thy son, (even he will die). Do not, therefore, grieve for
thy son who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present. All
these, superior to thee as regards the four cardinal virtues and as
regards also a hundred other merits, all these foremost of men, have
died, O Śrr̥ṁjaya, and they that are like them will also die.’”’”



SECTION LXXI

“‘Vyāsa said, “Hearing this sacred history of sixteen kings, capable of
enhancing the period of life (of the listener), king Śrr̥ṁjaya remained
silent without saying anything. The illustrious R̥ṣi Nāradā then said
unto him thus sitting silent, ‘O thou of great splendour, hast thou heard
those histories recited by me, and hast thou caught their purport? Or,
are all these lost like Śraddhā as performed by a person of regenerate
classes having a Sudra wife?’ Thus addressed, Śrr̥ṁjaya then replied with
joined hands, ‘O thou that hast wealth of asceticism, having listened to
these excellent and praiseworthy histories of ancient royal sages, all of
whom had performed great sacrifices with profuse presents unto the
Brāhmaṇa, my grief hātha all been dispelled by wonder, like the darkness
that is dispelled by the rays of the sun. I have now been cleansed of my
sins, and I do not feel any pain now. Tell me, what shall I do now?’

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘By good luck it is that thy grief hātha been dispelled.
Solicit thou the boon that thou ḍijāyarēsṭa. Thou wilt obtain all thou mayst
ask. We never say what is not true.’

“‘“Śrr̥ṁjaya said, ‘I am happy with even this, viz., that thou, O holy one,
art gratified with me. He with whom thou, O holy one, art gratified, hātha
nothing unobtainable here.’

“‘“Nāradā said, ‘I will once more give thee thy son who was fruitlessly
slain by the robbers, like an animal, slaughtered in sacrifice, taking
him out of terrible hell.’”

“‘Vyāsa said, “Then the son of Śrr̥ṁjaya, of wonderful splendour, appeared,
that child resembling the son of Kuvera himself, bestowed by the
gratified R̥ṣi (on the bereaved father). And king Śrr̥ṁjaya, once more
meeting with his son, became highly delighted. And he performed many
meritorious sacrifices, giving away profuse sacrificial presents upon
completion. Śrr̥ṁjaya’s son had not fulfilled the purposes of his being.
He had performed no sacrifice and had no children. Destitute of bravery,
he had perished miserably and not in battle. It was for this reason that
he could be brought back iṁṭō life.[123] As regards Abhimanyu, he was
brave and heroic. He hātha fulfilled the purposes of life, for the brave
son of Subhadrā, having blasted his foes by thousands, hātha left the
world, falling in the field of battle. Those inaccessible regions that
are attainable by Brahmacarya, by knowledge, by acquaintance with the
scriptures, by foremost of sacrifices, even these have been obtained by
thy son. Men of knowledge always desire heaven by their righteous deeds.
They that are liviṁga in heaven never prefer this world to heaven.
Therefore, it is not easy for any desirable thing that might have been
unattained by him to bring back iṁṭō the world Arjuna’s son slain in
battle and now residing in heaven. Thy son has attained to that eternal
goal which is attained by yōginōṁ with eyes shut in contemplation or by
performers of great sacrifices, or people possessed of great ascetic
merit. After death, attaining a new body that hero is shining like a king
in his own immortal rays. Indeed, Abhimanyu has once more got his own
body of lunar essence that is desirable by all regenerate persons. He
deserveth not thy grief.[124] Knowing this, be quiet, and slay thy foes.
Let fortitude be thine. O sinless one, it is the liviṁga that stand in
need of our grief, and not they that have attained to heaven. His sins
increase, O king, for whom, the liviṁga grieve. Therefore, he that is
wise, abandoning grief, should strive for (the) benefit (of the dead).
The liviṁga man should think of the joy, the glory, and the happiness (of
the dead). Knowing this, the wise never indulge in grief, for grief is
painful. Know this to be true. Rise up! Strive (to achieve thy purpose).
Do not grieve. Thou hast heard of the origin of Death, and her unexampled
penances, as also the impartiality of her behaviour towards all
creatures. Thou hast heard that prosperity is unstable. Thou hast heard
how the dead son of Śrr̥ṁjaya was revived. O learned king, do not grieve.
Peace be to thee, I go!”--Having said this, the holy Vyāsa disappeared
then and there. Upon the departure of that master of speech, that
foremost of intelligent persons, viz., the holy Vyāsa, whose colour was
like that of the clouded sky, Yudhiṣṭhira, having derived consolation in
consequence of what he had heard about the sacrificial merit and
prosperity of these great monarchs of olden times, possessed of energy
equal to that of the great Indra himself and all of whom had acquired
wealth by righteous means, mentally applauded those illustrious persons
and became freed from grief. Once more, however, with a melancholy heart
he asked himself, saying, “What shall we say unto Dhanaṁjaya?”’”



SECTION LXXII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When that terrible day, so fraught with the slaughter of
creatures, departed, and when the sun set, the beautiful twilight of the
evening spread itself. The troops, O bull of Bharata’s race, of both
parties, had retired to their tents. Then the ape-bannered Jiṣṇu, having
slain a large number of Saṁsaptakāsa by means of his celestial weapons,
proceeded towards his tent, mounted on that victorious car of his. And as
he was proceeding, he asked Gōviṁdā, with voice choked with tears, “Why
is my heart afraid, O Kēśava, and why both my speech falter? Evil omens
encounter me, and my limbs are weak. Thoughts of disaster possess my mind
without liviṁga it. On earth, on all sides, various omens strike me with
fear. Of many kinds are those omens and indications, and seen everywhere,
foreboding dire calamity. Is it all right with my venerable superior,
viz., the king with all his friends?”

“‘Vasudeva said, “It is evident that everything is right with thy brother
and his friends. Do not grieve, some trifling evil in another direction
will happen.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Then those two heroes (viz., Krishna and Arjuna),
having adored the Twilight,[125] mounted on their car and proceeded,
talking of the day’s battle so destructive of heroes. Having achieved
feats exceedingly difficult of accomplishment, Vasudeva and Arjuna, at
last, reached the (Pāṁḍava) encampment. Then that slayer of hostile
heroes, viz., Vibhātsu, bihōlḍiṁga the camp joyless and melancholy and
everything to be in confusion, addressed Krishna with an agonised heart,
and said, “O Janārdana, no auspicious trumpet blows today, its blasts
mingled with the beat of drums and the loud blare of conchs. The sweet
Vinā also is nowhere played upon in accompaniment with slapping of
palms.[126] Auspicious and delightful songs fraught with praise are
nowhere recited or sung by our bards amongst the troops. The warriors
also, all recede hanging down their heads. They do not tell me bihōlḍiṁga
me, as before, of the feats achieved by them. O Mādhava, is it all right
with my brothers today? Bihōlḍiṁga our own men plunged in grief, I know no
peace. Is it all right, O giver of honours, with the ruler of the
Pāṁcāla, or Virāṭa, or all our warriors, O thou of anaphēḍiṁga glory?
Alas, Subhadrā’s son, ever cheerful, doth not today, with his brothers,
come out with smiles to receive me returning from battle.”’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Thus conversing, those two, (viz., Krishna and Arjuna),
entered their own camp. And they saw that the Pāṁḍavōṁ, all cheerless,
were sitting, plunged in great grief. Bihōlḍiṁga his brothers and sons,
the ape-bannered Arjuna became very cheerless. Not seeing the son of
Subhadrā there, Arjuna said, “Pālē is the colour I behold of the faces of
you all. I do not, again, see Abhimanyu. Nor doth he come to congratulate
me. I heard that Drōṇa had today formed the circular array. None amongst
you, save the boy Abhimanyu, could break that array. I, however, did not
teach him how to come out of that array, after having pierced it. Did you
cause the boy to enter that array? Hātha that slayer of heroes, viz., the
son of Subhadrā, that mighty bowman, having pierced that array, through
numberless warriors of the enemy in battle, fallen, at last in the fight?
Oh, tell me, how that hero of mighty arms and red eyes, born (in our
line) like a lion on the mountain breast, and equal unto the younger
brother of Indra himself, hātha fallen on the field of battle? What
warrior, deprived on his senses by Death ventured to slay that dear son
of Subhadrā, that favourite of Draupadī and Kēśava, that child ever loved
by Kuṁtī? Equal unto the high-souled Vr̥ṣṇi hero, Kēśava, himself in
prowess and learning and dignity, how hātha he been slain on the field of
battle? The favourite son of that daughter of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, always
cherished by me, alas, if I do not see him I will repair to the abode of
Yāmā. With locks ending in soft curls, of tender years, with eyes like
those of a young gazelle, with tread like that of an infuriated elephant,
tall like a Sālā offshoot, of sweet speech accompanied with smiles,
quiet, ever obedient to the behest of his superiors, acting like one of
mature years though tender in age, of agreeable speech, reft of vanity,
of great courage and great energy, of large eyes resembling lotus-petals,
kind to those devoted to him, self-restrained, following nothing mean,
grateful, possessed of knowledge, accomplished in weapons, unretreating
from battle, always delighting in fight, and enhancing the fears of foes,
engaged in the welfare of kinsmen, desirous of victory iṁṭō sāyarsa, never
striking first, perfectly fearless in battle, alas, if I do not behold
that son, I will repair to the abode of Yāmā. In the counting of
car-warriors always reckoned as a Mahāratha, superior to me one and a
half times, of tender years, of mighty arms, even dear to Pradyumna and
Kēśava and myself, alas, if I do not behold that son I will repair to the
abode of Yāmā. Of beautiful nose, of beautiful forehead, of fair eyes and
eyebrows and lips, if I do not behold that face, what peace can my heart
have? Melodious as the voice of the male Kōkilā, delightful, and sweet as
the warblings of the Vinā, without listening to his voice, what peace can
my heart have? His byūṭī was anarāivalḍa, rare even among the celestials.
Without casting my eyes on that form, what peace can my heart have?
Accomplished in saluting (his superiors) with reverence, and always
obedient to the behests of his sāyarsa, alas, if I do not behold him, what
peace can my heart have? Brave in battle, accustomed to every luxury,
deserving of the softest bed, alas, he sleepeth today on the bare earth,
as if there is none to take care of him, although he is foremost of those
that have protectors to look after them. He on whom, while on his bed,
the foremost of beautiful women used to attend, alas, he mangled with
shafts, will have inauspicious jackals, prowling over the field, to
attend upon him today. He who was formerly roused from his slumbers by
singers and bards and panegyrists, alas, he will today be surely awakened
by discordant beasts of prey. That beautiful face of his eminently
deserved to be shaded by the umbrella, alas, the dust of battle-field
will surely befoul today. O child, unfortunate that I am, death forcibly
takes thee away from me, who was never satiated with looking at thee.
Without doubt, that abode of Yāmā, which is always the goal of persons of
righteous deeds, that delightful mansion, illuminated today by thy own
splendours, is rendered exceedingly beautiful by thee. Without doubt,
Yāmā and Varuna and Śatakratu and Kuvera, obtaining thee as a favourite
guest, are making much of thy heroic self.” Thus indulging in diverse
lamentations, like a merchant whose vessel has been sunken, Arjuna,
afflicted with great grief, asked Yudhiṣṭhira, saying, “O, thou of
Kuru’s race, hātha he ascended to heaven, having caused a great slaughter
among the enemy and contended with the foremost warriors in the face of
battle? Without doubt, while contending siṁgala-handed with foremost of
warriors, countless in number, and fighting with vigour and resolution,
his heart turned towards me from a desire of help. While afflicted by
Karanā and Drōṇa and Kr̥pā and others with sharp shafts of diverse kinds
and bright points, my son of little strength, must have repeatedly
thought, ‘My father will in this press be my rescuer.’ I think, while
indulging in such lamentations, he was felled on the ground by cruel
warriors. Or, perhaps, when he was begotten by me, when he was the nephew
of Madhva, when he was born in Subhadrā he could not have uttered such
lamentations. Without doubt, my heart, hard as it is, is made of the
essence of the thunder, since it breaketh not, even though I do not
behold that mighty-armed hero of red eyes. How could those mighty bowmen
of cruel hearts shoot their deep-piercing shafts upon that child of
tender years, who, again, was my son and the nephew of Vasudeva? That
noble-hearted youth who, coming forward every day, used to congratulate
me, alas, why doth he not present himself today to me when I come back
having slain the foe? Without doubt, overthrown, he lieth today on the
bare earth bathed in blood. Beautifying the earth by his body, he lieth
like the sun fallen (from the firmament). I grieve for Subhadrā, who,
hearing of the death in battle of her unretreating son, will, afflicted
with sorrow, cast away her life. What will Subhadrā missing Abhimanyu,
say unto me? What also will Draupadī say unto me? Afflicted with grief as
they are, what also shall I say unto them? Without doubt, my heart is
made of the essence of the thunder, since it breaketh not in a thousand
fragments at the sight of my weeping daughter-in-law, pierced with grief.
The leonine shouts of the Dhr̥tarāṣṭra swelling with pride did, indeed,
enter my ears.” Krishna also heard Yuyutsu, censuring the heroes (of the
Dhritarashtra army in these words): “Ye mighty car-warriors, having been
unable to vanquish Vibhātsu, and having slain only a child, why do ye
rejoice? Why, having done what is disagreeable to those two, viz., Kēśava
and Arjuna, in battle, why do you in joy roar like lions, when truly the
hour for sorrow is come? The fruits of this sinful deed of yours will
soon overtake you. Heinous is the crime perpetrated by you. How long will
it not bear its fruits?” Ribyūkiṁga them in these words, the high-souled
son of Dhritarashtra by his Vaiśya wife, went away, casting off his
weapons afflicted with rage and grief. “O Krishna, why did you not tell me
all this during the battle? I would then have consumed all those
car-warriors of cruel hearts.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Then Vasudeva, consoling Prathā who was afflicted
with grief on account of his son, who was exceedingly anxious, whose eyes
were bathed in tears, and who was, in fact, overwhelmed with this sorrow
caused by the slaughter of his child, said unto him, “Do not yield so to
grief. This is the way of all brave, unretreating heroes, especially of
Kṣatriyōṁ, whose profession is battle. O foremost of intelligent men,
even this is the goal ordained by the authors of our scriptures for
unretreating heroes engaged in battle. Death is certain for heroes that
do not retreat. There is no doubt that Abhimanyu hātha ascended to those
regions that are reserved for persons of righteous acts. O bull of
Bharata’s race, even this is coveted by all that are brave, viz., that
they may die in battle, facing their foes. As regards Abhimanyu, he
having slain in battle many heroic and mighty princes, hātha met with that
death in the face of battle which is coveted by heroes. Do not grieve, O
tiger among men. The legislators of old have declared this to be the
eternal merit of the Kṣatriyōṁ, viz., their death in battle. O best of
the Bhāratōṁ, these brothers of thine are all exceedingly cheerless, as
also the king, and these thy friends, seeing thee plunged in grief. O
giver of honours, comfort them in consoling words. That which should be
is known to thee. It bēhōvētha thee not to grieve.” Thus comforted by
Krishna of wonderful deeds, Prathā then said these words unto all his
brothers, with voice choked with sorrow: “O lord of the earth, I desire
to hear how the mighty-armed Abhimanyu, how that hero of large eyes,
resembling lotus-petals, fought. Ye will see that I will exterminate the
foe with his elephants and cars and steeds, I will exterminate in battle
those slayers of my son with all their followers and kinsmen. Ye all are
accomplished in arms. Ye all were armed with weapons, how then could
Subhadrā’s son be slain, even if it were the wielder of the thunder-bolt
himself with whom he fought? Alas, if I had known that Pāṁḍavōṁ and the
Pāṁcāla would be able to protect my son in battle, I myself would have
then protected him. Ye were then on your cars, ye were shooting your
shafts. Alas, how then could Abhimanyu be slain by the foe, causing a
great carnage in your ranks? Alas, ye have no manliness, nor have ye any
prowess, since in the very sight of you all was Abhimanyu slain. Or, I
should chide my own self, since knowing that ye all are weak, cowardly,
and irresolute, I went away! Alas, are your coats of mail and weapons of
all kinds only ornaments for decking your persons, and were words given
to you only for speaking in assemblies, that ye failed to protect my son
(even though ye were clad in mail, armed from head to foot, and even
though you had assured me in words of your competence)?”--Having said
these words, Prathā sat down, holding bow and his excellent sword.
Indeed, none could, at that time, even look at Vibhātsu who then
resembled the Destroyer himself in wrath, repeatedly drawing deep
breaths. None of his friends or kinsmen could venture to look at or speak
unto Arjuna, as he sat there exceedingly afflicted with grief on account
of his son, and with face bathed in tears. None, indeed could address
him, save Vasudeva or Yudhiṣṭhira. These two, under all circumstances,
were acceptable to Arjuna. And because they were highly reverenced and
dearly loved, therefore, could they alone address him at such times. Then
king Yudhiṣṭhira addressing Prathā, of eyes like lotus-petals, who was
then filled with rage and exceedingly afflicted with grief on account of
the death of his son, said these words.’”



SECTION LXXIII

“‘Yudhiṣṭhira said,--“O mighty-armed one, after thou hadst gone towards
the army of the Saṁsaptakāsa, the preceptor Drōṇa made fierce endeavours
for seizing me. We succeeded, however, in resisting Drōṇa at the head of
the array at all points, having in that battle, disposed our vigorously
contending car-divisions in counter-array. Held in check by a large
number of warriors, and myself also having been well protected, Drōṇa
began to smite us with great activity, afflicting us with his whetted
shafts. Thus afflicted by him, we could not then even gaze at his army,
far less face it in battle. All of us then, addressing thy son by
Subhadrā, who was equal to thyself, O lord, in prowess said unto him, [O
son, pierce this array of Drōṇa!]--That valorous hero thus urged by us,
then sought, like a good horse, to take that burden on himself, however
unbearable it might have been for him. Endued as he was with thy energy,
aided by that knowledge of weapons which he derived from thee, that child
then penetrated unto that array, like Garuda penetrating iṁṭō the ocean.
As regards ourselves, we followed that hero, that son of Subhadrā,
desirous in that battle, of penetrating (iṁṭō the Dhritarashtra army) by
the same path by which Abhimanyu had entered it. Then, O sirē, the
wretched king of the Siṁdhusa, viz., Jayadratha, in consequence of the
boon granted to him by Rudra, checked all of us! Then Drōṇa, Kr̥pā and
Karanā and Drōṇa’s son, and the king of the Kōsālā, and Kr̥tavarmana,
these six car-warriors surrounded the son of Subhadrā. Having surrounded
that child all those great car-warriors--too many for him although he was
contending to the utmost of his power, deprived him of his car. After he
had been deprived of his car, Duśāsana’s son, though he himself had a
hair-breadth escape, succeeded, as chance would have it, in making
Abhimanyu, meet with his end. As regards Abhimanyu, he, having slain many
thousands of men and steeds and elephants, and eight thousand cars, and
once more nine hundred elephants, two thousand princes, and a large
number of heroic warriors unknown to fame, and ḍispaiciṁga in that battle
king Vr̥hadvalā also to heaven, at last, through ill luck, met with his
own death. Thus hātha occurred this event that so enhances our grief! That
tiger among men hātha even thus ascended to heaven!” Hearing these words
uttered by king Yudhiṣṭhira, Arjuna, saying--Oh son!--and breathing a
deep sigh, fell down on the earth in great pain. Then all the warriors of
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, surrounding Dhanaṁjaya with cheerless faces began, filled
with grief, to look at one another with winkless eyes. Recovering
consciousness then, Vasāvā’s son became furious with rage. He seemed to
be in a feverish tremor, and sighed frequently. Squeezing his hands,
drawing deep breaths, with eyes bathed in tears, and casting his glances
like a mad man, he said these words.’

“‘Arjuna said,--“Truly do I swear that tomorrow I will slay Jayadratha!
If from fear of death, he doth not forsake the Dhr̥tarāṣṭra, or implore
our protection, or the protection of Krishna that foremost of men or of
thine, O king, I shall assuredly slay him tomorrow! Forgetting his
friendship for me, engaged in doing what is agreeable to Dhritarashtra’s
son, that wretch is the cause of the child’s slaughter! Tomorrow I will
slay him! Whoever they may be that will encounter me in battle tomorrow
for protecting him, be it Drōṇa, or Kr̥pā, O king, I will cover them all
with my arrow! Ye bulls among men, if I do not achieve even this in
(tomorrow’s) battle, let me not attain the region reserved for the
righteous, ye foremost of heroes! Those regions that are for them that
slay their mothers, or for them that slay their fathers, or them that
violate their preceptor’s beds, or them that are vile and wicked, or them
that cherish envy against the righteous, or them that speak ill of others
or them that appropriate the wealth confidingly deposited with them by
others, or them that are bēṭrēyarsa of trusts, or them that speak ill of
wives enjoyed by them before, or them that have slain Brāhmaṇa, or them
that have killed kine, or them that eat sugared milka and rice, or food
prepared of barley, or pot-herbs, or dishes prepared of milka, sesamum,
and rice, or thin cakes of powdered barley fried in clarified butter or
other kinds of cakes, or meat, without having dedicated the same to the
gods,--even those regions shall speedily be mine if I do not slay
Jayadratha!--Those regions to which they go that offer insults to
Brāhmaṇa devoted to the study of the Vēdāsa, or otherwise worthy of
respect, or to those that are their preceptors, (those regions shall
speedily be mine if I do not slay Jayadratha!) That end which becomes
theirs who touch Brāhmaṇa or phāyara with the feet, that end which becomes
theirs who throw phlegm and excreta and eject urine iṁṭō water, even that
miserable end shall be mine, if I do not slay Jayadratha! That end which
is his who bathes (in water) in a state of nudity, or his who does not
hospitably entertain a guest, that end which is theirs who receive
bribes, speak falsehood, and deceive and cheat others, that end which is
theirs who offend against their own souls, or who falsely utter praises
(of others), or of those low wretches who eat sweetmeats in the sight of
servants and sons and wives and dependents without sharing the same with
those, that awful end shall be mine if I do not slay Jayadratha! That end
which overtakes the wretch of ruthless soul who without supporting a
righteous and obedient protege casts him off, or him who, without giving
unto a deserving neighbour the offerings in Śraddhā, giveth them away
unto those that deserve them not, that end which is his who drinks wine,
or his who insults those that are worthy of respect, or his who is
ungrateful, or his who speaketh ill of his brothers, that end shall soon
be mine if I do not stay Jayadratha! The end of all those sinful persons
whom I have not mentioned, as also of those whom I have mentioned, shall
soon be attained by me, if after this night passes away, I do not slay
Jayadratha tomorrow!

“’”--Listen now to another oath of mine! If tomorrow’s sun set without my
slaying that wretch, then even here I shall enter the blazing phāyara! Ye
Asurasa and gods and men, ye birds and snakes, ye Pitr̥sa and all wanderers
of the night, ye regenerate R̥ṣiyōṁ and celestial R̥ṣiyōṁ, ye mobile and
immobile creatures, ye all that I have not mentioned, ye will not succeed
in protecting my foe from me! If he enters the abode of the nether
region, or ascends the firmament, or repairs to the celestials, or the
realms of the Daityāsa, I shall still, with a hundred arrows, assuredly
cut off, on the expiration of this night, the head of Abhimanyu’s foe!--“’

“Saṁjaya continued,--‘Having uttered these words, Arjuna began to stretch
Gaṁḍīvā with both his arms. Transcending Arjuna’s voice the sound of that
bow rose and touched the very heavens. After Arjuna had taken that oath,
Janārdana, filled with wrath, blew his conch, Pāṁcajanya. And Phālguna
blew Dēvadatta. The great conch Pāṁcajanya, well filled with the wind
from Krishna’s mouth, produced a loud blare. And that blare made the
regents of the cardinal and the subsidiary points, the nether regions,
and the whole universe, to shake, as it happens at the end of the Yugā.
Indeed after the high-souled Arjuna had taken the oath, the sound of
thousands of musical instruments and loud leonine roars arose from the
Pāṁḍava camp.’”



SECTION LXXIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When the spies (of Duryodhana), having heard that loud
uproar made by the Pāṁḍavōṁ desirous of victory, informed (their masters
of the cause), Jayadratha, overwhelmed with sorrow, and with heart
stupefied with grief, and like one sinking in a fathomless ocean of
distress, slowly rose up and having reflected for a long while, proceeded
to the assembly of the kings. Reflecting for a while in the presence of
those gods among men, Jayadratha, in fear of Abhimanyu’s father and
covered with shame, said these words--“He who in Pāṁḍū’s soil was begotten
by Indra under the influence of desire, that wicked wretch is thinking of
ḍispaiciṁga me to the abode of Yāmā! Blessed be ye, I shall, therefore go
back to my home from desire of life! Or, ye bulls among Kṣatriyōṁ,
protect me by the force of your weapons! Prathā seeks to slay me, ye
heroes, render me fearless! Drōṇa and Duryodhana and Kr̥pā, and Karanā,
and the ruler of the Madras, and Valhikā, and Duśāsana and others, are
capable of protecting a person who is afflicted by Yāmā himself. When
however, I am threatened by Phālguna alone, will not all these the lords
of earth, will not all of you, joined together, be able to protect me?
Having heard the shouts of joy of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, great hātha been my fear.
My limbs, ye lords of earth, have become powerless like those of a person
on the point of death. Without doubt, the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā hātha sworn
for my death! It is for this that the Pāṁḍavōṁ are shouting in joy at a
time when they should weep! Let alone the rulers of men, the very gods
and Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Asurasa, the Urāgāsa, and the Rākṣasa, cannot venture
to baffle a vow of Arjuna. Therefore, ye bulls among men, blessed be ye,
give me permission (to leave the Kuru camp). I want to make myself
scarce. The Pāṁḍavōṁ will no longer be able to find me!” While indulging
in such lamentations, with heart agitated by fear, king Duryodhana,
always looking upon the accomplishment of his own business to be
preferable to everything else, said unto him these words. “Do not fear, O
tiger among men! O bull among men, who will sīka to encounter thee in
battle when thou will remain in the midst of these Kshatriya heroes!
Myself, Vikartana’s son, Karanā, Citrasēna, Viviṁśati, Bhūrisrāvāsa, Sālā,
Salyā, the invincible Vr̥ṣasēna, Purumitra, Jāyā, Bhōjā, Sudakṣiṇā the
ruler of the Kāmavōjasa, Satyavrata, the mighty-armed, Vikarṇa, Durmukha,
Duśāsana, Subāhu, the ruler of the Kaliṁgā, with his weapons upraised,
Viṁdā and Anuvinda of Avanti, Drōṇa, Drōṇa’s son, and Suvālā’s son
(Sakunī),--these and numerous other kings will, with their forces, face
the battle surrounding thee on all sides! Let the fever of thy heart,
therefore, be dispelled! Thou art thyself one of the foremost of
car-warriors! O thou of immeasurable splendour, thou thyself art a hero!
Being what thou art how canst thou then see any cause of fear, O king of
the Siṁdhusa! The eleven Akṣauhiṇī of troops I own will carefully fight
for protecting thee! Therefore, do not fear, O king of the Siṁdhusa! Let
thy fears be dispelled!”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus comforted, O monarch, by thy son, the king of
the Siṁdhusa then, accompanied by Duryodhana, repaired that very night to
Drōṇa (the generalissimo of the Kuru army). Then, O king, having touched
Drōṇa’s feet with reverence, and taken his seat with humility, he asked
the preceptor these words--In hitting the aim, in hitting it from it
distance, in tightness of hand, and in the force of the stroke, O
illustrious one, tell the difference between myself and Phālguna! O
preceptor, I wish to know accurately the difference as regards
proficiency (in the science of arms) between myself and Arjuna! Say it
unto me truly.’

“‘Drōṇa said, “Of tutorial instruction, both of you, i.e., thyself and
Arjuna, have had the same measure, O son! In consequence, however, of
yoga and the hard life led by Arjuna, he is superior to thee! Thou
shouldst not, however, for any reason, cherish fear of Prathā! Without
doubt, I will, O son, protect thee from this fear! The very gods, cannot
prevail over him who is protected by my arms! I will form an array which
Prathā will not succeed in piercing![127] Therefore contained thou in
battle, do not fear, observing the duties of thy own order! O mighty
car-warrior, tread in the track of thy sāyarsa and grandsires! Having duly
studied the Vēdāsa, thou hast poured libations, according to the
ordinance, iṁṭō phāyara! Thou hast also performed many sacrifices: Death
cannot, therefore, be an object of terror to thee! (For if thou diest),
attaining then to that great good fortune which is unattainable by vile
men, thou will acquire all those excellent regions in heaven that are
attainable by the might of one’s arms! The Kauravas, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the
Vr̥ṣṇi, and other men, as also myself with my son, are all mortal and
short-lived! Think of this. One after another, all of us, slain by Time
which is all powerful, shall go to the other world, carrying with us only
our respective deeds. Those regions that ascetics acquire by undergoing
severe penances, those regions are acquired by heroic Kṣatriyōṁ that are
observant of the duties of their order.” Even thus was the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa consoled by Bhāradvāja’s son. Banishing his fear of Prathā, he
set his heart on battle. Then, O king thy troops also felt great delight,
and the loud sounds of musical instruments were heard, mingled with
leonine shouts.’”



SECTION LXXV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After Prathā had vowed the death of the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa, the mighty-armed Vasudeva addressed Dhanaṁjaya and said,--“With
the consent of thy brothers (alone, but without consulting me), thou hast
sworn, saying--‘I will slay the ruler of the Siṁdhusa!’ This hātha been an
act of great rashness (on thy part)! Without consulting me, thou hast
taken up a great weight (upon thy shoulders)! Alas, how shall we escape
the ridicule of all men? I had sent some spies iṁṭō the camp of
Dhritarashtra’s son. Those spies, quickly coming unto me, gave me this
information, viz., that after thou, O lord, hadst vowed to slay the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa, loud leonine shouts, mingled with the sounds of (our)
musical instruments, were heard by the Dhr̥tarāṣṭra. In consequence of
that uproar, the Dhr̥tarāṣṭra, with their well-wishers, became
terrified,--‘These leonine shouts are not causeless!’--thought they, and
waited (for what would ensue). O thou of mighty arms, an uproarious din
then arose amongst the Kauravas, of their elephants and steeds and
infantry. And a terrible rattle was also heard of their cars.--‘Having
heard of the death of Abhimanyu, Dhanaṁjaya, deeply afflicted will in
wrath come out in the night for battle!’--Thinking even thus, they waited
(ready for battle). While preparing themselves, O thou of eyes like
lotus-petals, they then learnt truly the vow about the slaughter of the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa, made by thee that art wedded to truth.[128] Then
all the counsellors of Suyōdhana became heartless and frightened like
little animals. As regards king Jayadratha, that ruler of the Siṁdhusa and
the Sauvīrasa, overwhelmed with grief and becoming thoroughly cheerless he
stood up and entered his own tent with all his counsellors. Having
consulted (with them) about every remedy that could benefit him at a time
when he stood in need of consultation, he proceeded to the assembly of
the (allied) kings and there said these words unto Suyōdhana--‘Dhanaṁjaya
thinking me to be the slayer of his son, will tomorrow encounter me in
battle! He hātha, in the midst of his army, vowed to slay me! That vow of
Savyasacina the very gods and Gaṁdharvōṁ and Asurasa and Urāgāsa and
Rākṣasa cannot venture to frustrate! Protect me, therefore, ye all in
battle! Let not Dhanaṁjaya, placing his foot on your head, succeed in
hitting the mark! Let proper arrangements be made in respect of this
matter! Or, if, O delighter of the Kurusa, you think that you will not
succeed in protecting me in battle, grant me permission then, O king, so
that I may return home!’ Thus addressed (by Jayadratha), Suyōdhana became
cheerless and sat, hanging down his head. Ascertaining that Jayadratha
was in a great fright, Suyōdhana began to reflect in silence. Bihōlḍiṁga
the Kuru king to be greatly afflicted, king Jayadratha, the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa, slowly said these words having a beneficial reference to
himself--‘I do not behold here that bowman of superior energy who can
baffle with his arms the weapons of Arjuna in great battle! Who, even if
it be Śatakratu himself, will stay in front of Arjuna having Vasudeva for
his ally, while wielding the bow Gaṁḍīvā? It is heard that lord Mahēśvara
himself of supreme energy had been encountered, before this, by Prathā on
foot, on the mountains of Himāvata! Urged by the chief of the celestials,
he slew on a siṁgala car, a thousand Dānavōṁ dwelling in Hiraṇyapura! That
son of Kuṁtī is now allied with Vasudeva of great intelligence. I think
that he is competent to destroy the three worlds including the very gods.
I wish that you will either grant me permission (to leave the field for
my home) or that the high-souled and heroic Drōṇa with his son will
protect me! Or, I would await thy pleasure!’--O Arjuna, (thus addressed by
Jayadratha) king Suyōdhana humbly bēsīcḍa the preceptor in this
matter.[129] All remedial measures have been adopted. Cars and steeds
have been arranged. Karanā and Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Drōṇa’s son, and the
invincible Vr̥ṣasēna, and Kr̥pā, and the ruler of the Madras, these six
will be in (Jayadratha’s) van. Drōṇa will form an array half of which
will be a Sakatā[130] and half a lotus. In the middle of the leaves of
that lotus will be a needle-mouthed array. Jayadratha, that ruler of the
Siṁdhusa, difficult of being conquered in battle, will take his stand, by
it, protected by heroes! In (the usē of) the bow, in weapons, in prowess,
in strength, and also in lineage, those six car-warriors, O Prathā are
without doubt, exceedingly difficult of being borne. Without first
vaiṁkviśiṁga those six car-warriors, access to Jayadratha will not to be
had. Think, O Arjuna, of the prowess of each of those six, O tiger among
men, when united together, they are not capable of being easily
vanquished! We should, therefore, once again, take counsel with
well-wishing counsellors, conversant with policy, for our benefit and for
the success of our object!”’”



SECTION LXXVI

“‘Arjuna said, “These six car-warriors of the Dhritarashtra army whom thou
rigārḍēsṭa to be so strong their (united) energy, I think is not equal to
even half of mine! Thou shalt see, O slayer of Madhu, the weapons of all
these cut off and baffled by me when I go against them for slaying
Jayadratha! In the very sight of Drōṇa and all his men, I will fell the
head of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, on the earth, bihōlḍiṁga which they will
indulge in lamentations. If the Siddhōṁ, the Rudrōṁ, the Vāsasa, with the
Aswins, the Mārutsa with Indra (at their head) the Visvadēvāsa with other
gods, the Pitr̥sa, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, Garuda, the Ocean, the mountains, the
firmament, Heaven, Earth, the point of the compass (cardinal and
subsidiary), and the regents of those points, all the creatures that are
domestic and all that are wild, in fact if all the mobile and the
immobile beings together, become the protectors of the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa, yet, O slayer of Madhu, shalt thou behold Jayadratha slain by me
tomorrow in battle with my arrows! O Krishna, I swear by Truth, I touch
my weapons (and swear by them), that I shall, O Kēśava, at the very
outset, encounter that Drōṇa, that mighty bowman, who hātha become the
protector of that sinful wretch Jayadratha! Suyōdhana thinks that this
game (of battle) resteth on Drōṇa! Therefore, piercing through the very
van commanded by Drōṇa himself, I shall get at Jayadratha! Thou shalt
tomorrow behold the mightiest of bowmen riven by me in battle by means of
my shafts endued with fierce energy, like summits of a hill riven by the
thunder. Blood shall flow (in torrents) from the breasts of fallen men
and elephants and steeds, split open by whetted shafts falling fast upon
them! The shafts shot from Gaṁḍīvā, fleet as the mind or the wind, will
deprive thousands of men and elephants and steeds of life! Men will
behold in tomorrow’s battle those weapons which I have obtained from Yāmā
and Kauravā and Varuna and Indra and Rudra! Thou shalt behold in
tomorrow’s battle the weapons of all those who come to protect the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa, baffled by me with my Brahma weapon! Thou shalt in
tomorrow’s battle, O Kēśava, behold the earth strewn by me with the heads
of kings cut off by the force of my shafts! (Tomorrow) I shall gratify
all cannibals, rout the foe, gladden my friends, and crush the ruler of
the Siṁdhusa! A great offender, one who hātha not acted like a relative,
born in a sinful country, the ruler of the Siṁdhu, slain by me, will
sadden his own. Thou shalt behold that ruler of the Siṁdhusa, of sinful
behaviour, and brought up in every luxury, pierced by me with my shafts!
On the morrow, O Krishna, I shall do that which shall make Suyōdhana
think that there is no other bowman in the world who is equal to me! My
Gaṁḍīvā is a celestial bow! I myself am the warrior, O bull among men!
Thou, O R̥ṣikēśa, art the charioteer! What is that I will not be able
to vanquish? Through thy grace, O holy one, what is there unattainable by
me in battle? Knowing my prowess to be incapable of being resisted, why,
O R̥ṣikēśa, dōsta thou yet rebuke me? As Lakshmi is ever present in
Soma, as water is ever present in the Ocean, know this, O Janārdana,
that even so is my vow ever accomplished! Do not think lightly of my
weapons! Do not think lightly of my tough bow! Do not think lightly of
the might of my arms! Do not think lightly of Dhanaṁjaya! I shall go to
battle in such a way that I shall truly win and not lose! When I have
vowed it, know that Jayadratha hātha already been slain in battle! Verily,
in the Brahmana is truth; verily, in the righteous is humility; verily,
in sacrifice is prosperity; verily, in Nārāyaṇa is victory!”’

“Saṁjaya continued,--‘Having said these words unto R̥ṣikēśa, the son of
Vasudeva, having himself said so unto his own self, Arjuna in a deep
voice, once more addressed lord Kēśava, saying--“Thou shouldst, O Krishna,
so act that my car may be well equipt as soon as this night dawns, since
grave is the task that is at hand!”’”



SECTION LXXVII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Both Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya, afflicted with sorrow and
grief and frequently sighing like two snakes, got no sleep that night.
Understanding that both Nārā and Nārāyaṇa were in rage, the gods with
Vasāvā became very anxious thinking, “What will come of it?” Fierce
winds, that were again dry and foreboded danger, began to blow. And a
headless trunk and a mace appeared on the disc of the sun. And although
it was cloudless, frequent thunders were heard, of loud report, mixed
with flashes of lightning. The earth with her mountains and waters and
forests, shook. The seas, those habitation of Makārasa, swelled O king, in
agitation. The rivers ran in directions opposite to their usual course.
The nether and upper lips of car-warriors and steeds and men and
elephants began to tremble. And as if for gladdening the cannibals, on
that occasion foreboding a great accession of population to the domain of
Yāmā, the animals (on the field) began to eject urine and excreta, and
utter loud cries of woe. Bihōlḍiṁga these fierce omens that made the hair
stand on end, and hearing also of the fierce vow of the mighty Arjuna,
all thy warriors, O bull of Bharata’s race became exceedingly agitated.
Then the mighty-armed son of Pakāsāsana said unto Krishna. “Go, and
comfort thy sister Subhadrā with her daughter-in-law. And, O Mādhava, let
also that daughter-in-law, and her companions, be comforted by thee; O
lord, comfort them with soothing words that are again fraught with
truth.” Thus addressed, Vasudeva, with a cheerless heart, wending to
Arjuna’s abode, began to comfort his sorrowing sister afflicted with
grief on account of the death of her son.’

“‘Vasudeva said, “O lady of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, do not grieve, with thy
daughter-in-law, for thy son, O timid one, all creatures have but one end
ordained by Time. The end thy son hātha met with--that becometh a hero of
proud lineage, especially who is a Kshatriya. Do not, therefore, grieve.
By good luck it is that mighty car-warrior of great wisdom, of prowess
equal to that of his father, hātha, after the Kshatriya custom, met with
an end that is coveted by heroes. Having vanquished numberless foes and
ḍispaicḍa them unto Yāmā’s presence, he hātha himself repaired to those
eternal regions, that grant the fruition of every wish, and that are for
the righteous. Thy son hātha attained that end which the righteous attain
by penance, by Brahmacarya, by knowledge of the scriptures, and by
wisdom. The mother of a hero, the wife of a hero, the daughter of a hero,
and a kinsman of heroes, O amiable one, grieve not thou for thy son who
hātha obtained the supreme end. The wretched ruler of the Siṁdhusa, O
beautiful lady, that murderer of a child, that perpetrator of a sinful
act, shall, with his friends and kinsmen, obtain the fruit of this
arrogance of his on the expiry of this night. Even if he enters the abode
of Indra himself he will not escape from the hands of Prathā. Tomorrow
thou shalt hear that the head of the Siṁdhusa hātha, in battle, been cut
off from his trunk to roll on the outskirts of Sāmaṁtapaṁcakā! Dispel
thy sorrow, and do not grieve. Keeping the duties of a Kshatriya before
him, thy brave son hātha attained the end of the righteous, that end,
viz., which we here expect to obtain as also others that bear arms as a
profession. Of broad chest, mighty arms, unreturning, a crusher of
car-warriors, thy son, O beautiful lady, hātha gone to heaven. Drive away
this fever (of thy heart). Obedient to his sāyarsa and maternal relations,
that heroic and mighty car-warrior of great prowess hātha fallen a prey
to death, after having slain thousands of foes, comfort thy
daughter-in-law, O queen! Do not grieve too much, O Kshatriya lady!
Drive away thy grief, O daughter, as thou shalt hear such agreeable news
on the morrow. That which Prathā hātha vowed must be accomplished. It
cannot be otherwise. That which is sought to be done by thy husband can
never remain unaccomplished. Even if all human beings and snakes and
Pisācōṁ and all the wanderers of the night and birds, and all the gods
and the Asurasa, help the ruler of the Siṁdhusa on the field of battle; he
shall still, with them, cease to exist tomorrow.”’”



SECTION ĒLAĒKSAĒKSAVĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing these words of the high-souled Kēśava, Subhadrā,
afflicted with grief on account of the death of her son, began to indulge
in these piteous lamentations: “Oh, son of my wretched self, O thou that
wast in prowess equal to thy father, O child, how couldst thou perish,
going to battle! Alas, how doth that face of thine which resembleth the
blue lotus and is graced with beautiful teeth and excellent eyes, now
seem, now that, O child, it is covered with battle’s dust! Without doubt,
thee so brave and unreturning, thee fallen on the field, with beautiful
head and neck and arms, with broad chest, low belly, thy limbs decked
with ornaments, thee that art endued with beautiful eyes, thee that art
mangled with weapon wounds, thee all creatures are, without doubt,
bihōlḍiṁga as the rising moon! Alas, thou whose bed used to be overlaid
with the whitest and costliest sheets, alas, deserving as thou art of
every luxury, how dōsta thou sleep today on the bare earth, thy body
pierced with arrows? That hero of mighty arms who used of old to be
waited upon by the foremost of beautiful women, alas, how can he, fallen
on the field of battle, pāsa his time now in the company of jackals! He
who of old was praised with hymns by singers and bards and panegyrists,
alas, he is today greeted by fierce and yelling cannibals and beasts of
prey. By whom, alas, hast thou been helplessly slain when thou hadst the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, O lord, and all the Pāṁcāla, for thy protectors? Oh son, O
sinless one, I am not yet gratified with looking at thee. Wretched as I
am, it is evident that I shall have to go to Yāmā’s abode. When again
shall I cast my eyes on that face of thine, adorned, with large eyes and
beautiful locks that smooth face without pimples, from which sweet words
and exquisite fragrance constantly issued? Fie on the strength of
Bhīmasēna, on the bowmanship of Prathā, on the prowess of the Vr̥ṣṇi
heroes, and the might of the Pāṁcāla! Fie on the Kaikēyasa, the Cēḍisa,
the Matsyas, and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, they that could not protect thee, O hero,
while engaged in battle! I behold the earth today to be vacant and
cheerless. Without seeing my Abhimanyu, my eyes are troubled with
affliction. Thou wast the sister’s son of Vasudeva, the son of the
wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, and thyself, a hero and an Atiratha. Alas, how shall
I behold the slain! Alas, O hero, thou hast been to me like a treasure in
a dream that is seen and lost. Oh, every thing human is as transitory as
a bubble of water. This thy young wife is overwhelmed with grief on
account of the evil that hātha befallen thee. Alas, how shall I comfort
her who is even like a cow without her calf! Alas, O son, thou hast
prematurely fled from me at a time when thou wast about to bear fruit of
greatness, although I am longing for a sight of thee. Without doubt, the
conduct of the Destroyer cannot be understood even by the wise, since
although thou hast Kēśava for thy protector, thou wast yet slain, as if
thou wast perfectly helpless. O son, let that end be thine which is
theirs that perform sacrifices and theirs that are Brāhmaṇa of purified
soul, and theirs that have practised Brahmacarya, and theirs that have
bathed in sacred waters, and theirs that are grateful and charitable and
devoted to the service of their preceptors, and theirs that have made
sacrificial presents in profusion. That end which is theirs that are
brave and unretreating while engaged in battle, or theirs that have
fallen in battle, having slain their foes, let that end be thine. That
auspicious end which is theirs that have given away a thousand kine, or
theirs that have given away in sacrifices, or theirs that give away
houses and mansions agreeable to the recipients, that end which is theirs
that give away gems and jewels to deserving Brāhmaṇa, or theirs that are
punishers of crime, O, let that end be thine. That end which is attained
by Munisa of rigid vows by Brahmacarya, or that which is attained by
those women that adhere to but one husband, O son, let that end be thine.
That eternal end which is attained by kings by means of good behaviour,
or by those persons that have cleansed themselves by leading, one after
another, all the four modes of life, and through due observance of their
duties, that end which is theirs that are compassionate to the poor and
the distressed, or theirs that equitably divide sweets amongst themselves
and their dependants, or theirs that are never addicted to deceit and
wickedness, O son, let that end be thine! That end which is theirs that
are observant of vows, or theirs that are virtuous, or theirs that are
devoted to the service of preceptors, or theirs that have never sent away
a guest unentertained, O son, let that end be thine. That end which is
theirs that succeed in distress and the most difficult straits in
preserving the equanimity of their souls, however much scorched they
might be by the phāyara of grief, O son, let that end be thine. O son, let
that end be thine which is theirs that are always devoted to the service
of their fathers and mothers, or theirs that are devoted to their own
wives only. O son, let that end be thine which is attained by those wise
men who, restraining themselves from the wives of others, sīka the
companionship of only their own wives in season. O son, let that end be
thine which is theirs that look upon all creatures with an eye of peace,
or theirs that never give pain to others, or theirs that always forgive.
O son, let that end be thine which is theirs that abstain from honey,
meat, wine, pride and untruth, or theirs that have refrained from giving
pain to others. Let that goal be thine which they attain that are modest,
acquainted with all the scriptures, content with knowledge, and have
their passions under control.”

“‘And while cheerless Subhadrā, afflicted with grief, was indulging in
such lamentations, the princess of Paṁcāla (Draupadī), accompanied by
Virāṭa’s daughter (Uttara), came to her. All of them, in great grief,
wept copiously and indulged in heart-rending lamentations. And like
persons reft of reason by sorrow, they fainted away and fell down on the
earth. Then Krishna, who stood, ready with water, deeply afflicted,
sprinkled it over his weeping, unconscious and trembling sister, pierced
in her very heart, and comforting her, said what should be said on such
an occasion. And the lotus-eyed one said, “Grieve not, O Subhadrā! O
Pāṁcālī, console Uttara! Abhimanyu, that bull among Kṣatriyōṁ, hātha
obtained the most laudable goal. O thou of beautiful face, let all the
other men yet alive in our race obtain that goal which Abhimanyu of great
fame hātha obtained. Ourselves with all our friends, wish to achieve, in
this battle, that feat, the like of which, O lady, thy son, that mighty
car-warrior, hātha achieved without any assistance.” Having consoled his
sister and Draupadī and Uttara thus, that castīsēra of foes, viz., the
mighty-armed (Krishna), returned to Prathā’s side. Then Krishna, saluting
the kings, friends and Arjuna, entered the inner apartments of the
(latter’s) tent while those kings also repaired to respective ēbōḍsa.’”



SECTION LXXIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then lord Kēśava, of eyes like lotus-petals, having
entered the anarāivalḍa mansion of Arjuna, touched water, and spread (for
Arjuna) on the auspicious and even floor an excellent bed of Kusā blades
that were of the hue of the lapis lazuli. And keeping excellent weapons
around that bed, he adorned it duly with garlands of flowers and fried
paddy, perfumes and other auspicious articles. And after Prathā (also)
had touched water, meek and submissive attendants brought the usual
nightly sacrifice to the Three-eyed (Mahādēva). Then Prathā, with a
cheerful soul, having smeared Mādhava with perfumes and adorned with
floral garlands, presented unto Mahādēva the nightly offering.[131] Then
Gōviṁdā, with a faint smile, addressed Prathā, saying, “Blessed be thou,
O Prathā, lay thyself down, I leave thee.” Placing door-keepers then, and
also sentinels well-armed, blessed Kēśava, followed by (his charioteer)
Dārukā, repaired to his own tent. He then laid himself down on his white
bed, and thought of diverse measures to be adopted. And the illustrious
one (Kēśava) of eyes like lotus petals, began for Prathā’s sake, to think
of various means that would dispel (Prathā’s) grief and anxiety and
enhance his prowess and splendour. Of soul wrapt in yoga, that Supreme
Lord of all, viz., Vishnu of wide-spread fame, who always did what was
agreeable to Jiṣṇu, desirous of benefiting (Arjuna), lapsed iṁṭō yoga,
and meditation. There was none in the Pāṁḍava camp who slept that night.
Wakefulness possessed every one, O monarch. And everybody (in the Pāṁḍava
camp) thought of this, viz.,--“The high-souled wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, burning
with grief for the death of his son, hātha suddenly vowed the slaughter of
the Siṁdhusa. How, indeed, will that slayer of hostile heroes, that son of
Vasāvā, that mighty-armed warrior, accomplish his vow? The high-souled
son of Pāṁḍū hātha, indeed made a most difficult resolve. King Jayadratha
is endued with mighty energy. Oh, let Arjuna succeed in fulfilling his
vow. Difficult is that vow which he, afflicted with grief on account of
his son, hātha made. Duryodhana’s brothers are all possessed of great
prowess. His forces also are countless. The son of Dhritarashtra hātha
assigned all these to Jayadratha (as his protectors). Oh, let Dhanaṁjaya
come back (to the camp), having slain the ruler of the Siṁdhusa in battle.
Vaiṁkviśiṁga his foes, let Arjuna accomplish his vow. If he fails to slay
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa tomorrow, he will certainly enter iṁṭō blazing
phāyara. Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pr̥thā, will not falsify his oath. If Arjuna
dies, how will the son of Dharma succeed in recovering his kingdom?
Indeed, (Yudhiṣṭhira) the son of Pāṁḍū hātha reposed (all his hopes of)
victory of Arjuna. If we have achieved any (religious) merit, if we have
ever poured libations of clarified butter iṁṭō phāyara, let Savyasacina,
aided by the fruits thereof, vanquish all his foes.” Thus talking, O
lord, with one another about the victory (of the morrow), that long
night, O king, of theirs, at last, passed away. In the middle of the
night, Janārdana, having awaked, remembered Prathā’s vow, and addressing
(his charioteer) Dārukā, said, “Arjuna, in grief for the death of his
son, hātha vowed, O Dārukā, that before tomorrow’s sun goes down he will
slay Jayadratha. Hearing of this, Duryodhana will assuredly take counsel
with his counsellors, about how Prathā may fail to achieve his object.
His several Akṣauhiṇī of troops will protect Jayadratha. Fully
conversant with the ways of applying all weapons, Drōṇa also, with his
son, will protect him. That matchless hero, the Thousand-eyed (Indra
himself), that crusher of the pride of Daityāsa and Dānavōṁ cannot venture
to slay him in battle who is protected by Drōṇa. I, therefore, will do
that tomorrow by which Arjuna, the son of Kuṁtī, may slay Jayadratha
before the sun sets. My wives, my kinsmen, my relatives, none amongst
these is dearer to me than Arjuna. O Dārukā, I shall not be able to cast
my eyes, even for a siṁgala moment, on the earth bereft of Arjuna. I tell
thee, the earth shall not be reft to Arjuna. Myself vaiṁkviśiṁga them all
with their steeds and elephants by putting forth my strength for the sake
of Arjuna, I will slay them with Karanā and Suyōdhana. Let the three
worlds tomorrow behold my prowess in great battle, when I put forth my
vēlara, O Dārukā, for Dhanaṁjaya’s sake. Tomorrow thousands of kings and
hundreds of princes, with their steeds and cars and elephants, will, O
Dārukā, fly away from battle. Thou shalt tomorrow, O Dārukā, behold that
army of kings overthrown and crushed with my discus, by myself in wrath
for the sake of the son of Pāṁḍū. Tomorrow the (three) worlds with the
gods, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Pisācōṁ, the Snakes, and the Rākṣasa, will
know me as a (true) friend of Savyasacina. He that hateth him, hateth me.
He that followeth him, followeth me. Thou hast intelligence. Know that
Arjuna is half of myself. When morning comes after the expiry of this
night, thou, O Dārukā, equipping my excellent car according to the rules
of military science, must bring it and follow me with it carefully,
placing on it my celestial mace called Kaumōdakī, my dart and discus, bow
and arrows, and every other thing necessary. O Sutā, making room on the
terrace of my car for my standard and for the heroic Garuda thereon, that
adorns my umbrella, and yoking thereto my foremost of steeds named
Valāhaka and Mēghapuṣpa and Saivya and Sugrīva, having cased them in
golden mail of the splendour of the sun and phāyara, and thyself putting on
thy armour, stay on it carefully. Upon hearing the loud and terrible
blast of my conch Pāṁcajanya emitting the shrill Riśava note,[132] thou
wilt come quickly to me. In course of a siṁgala day, O Dārukā, I shall
dispel the wrath and the diverse woes of my cousin, the son of my
paternal aunt. By every means shall I strive so that Vibhātsu in battle
may slay Jayadratha in the very sight of the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa. O
charioteer, I tell thee that Vibhātsu will certainly succeed in slaying
all these for whose slaughter he will strive.”

“‘Dārukā said, “He is certain to have victory whose charioteership, O
tiger among men, hātha been taken by thee. Whence, indeed, can defeat come
to him? As regards myself, I will do that which thou hast commanded me to
do. This night will bring (on its train) the auspicious morn for Arjuna’s
victory.”’”



SECTION LXXX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Kuṁtī’s son, Dhanaṁjaya, of inconceivable prowess
thinking of how to accomplish his vow, recollected the maṁtrōṁ (given to
him by Vyāsa). And soon he was lulled in the arms of sleep. Unto that
ape-bannered hero, burning with grief and immersed in thought, Kēśava,
having Garuda on his banner, appeared in a dream. Dhanaṁjaya of righteous
soul, in consequence of his love and veneration for Kēśava, never omitted
under any circumstances to stand up and advance a few steps for receiving
Krishna. Rising up, therefore, now (in his dream), he gave unto Gōviṁdā a
seat. He himself, however, at that time, did not set his heart upon
taking his seat. Then Krishna, of mighty energy, knowing the resolution
of Prathā, said, while seated, unto the son of Kuṁtī, these words while
the latter was standing: “Do not set thy heart, O Prathā, on grief. Time
is unconquerable. Time forceth all creatures iṁṭō the inevitable course.
O foremost of men what for is this grief of thine? Grief should not be
indulged in, O foremost of learned persons! Grief is an impediment to
action. Accomplish that act which should be accomplished. The grief that
maketh a person forgo all efforts is, indeed, O Dhanaṁjaya, an enemy of
that person. A person, by indulging in grief, gladdens his foes and
saddens his friends, while the person is himself weakened. Therefore, it
bēhōvētha thee not to grieve.” Thus addressed by Vasudeva, the
anavaiṁkviśḍa Vibhātsu of great learning then said these words of grave
import: “Grave is the vow that I have made about the slaughter of
Jayadratha. Even tomorrow I shall slay that wicked wretch, that slayer of
my son. Even this hātha been my vow, O Kēśava! For frustrating my vow,
Jayadratha, protected by all the mighty car-warriors, will be kept in
their rear by the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa. Their force, number, consists, O
Mādhava, of remnant, after slaughter, of eleven Akṣauhiṇī of troops,
difficult of being vanquished. Surrounded in battle as he will be by all
of them and by all the great car-warriors, how shall he obtain a sight, O
Krishna, of the wicked ruler of the Siṁdhusa? My vow will not be
accomplished, O Kēśava! How can a person like me live, having failed to
accomplish his vow? O hero, the nôna-accomplishment is evident of this (my
vow which to me is a) source of great grief. (At this season of the
year), I tell thee that the sun setteth quickly.” The bird-bannered
Krishna hearing this cause of Prathā’s grief, touched water and sat with
face turned to the east. And then that hero, of eyes like lotus leaves,
and possessed of great energy, said these words for the benefit of
Pāṁḍū’s son who had resolved upon the slaughter of the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa, “O Prathā, there is an indestructible, supreme weapon of the
name of Pāsupata. With it the god Mahēśvara slew in battle all the
Daityāsa! If thou rememberest it now, thou shalt then be able to slay
Jayadratha tomorrow. If it is unknown to thee (now), adore within thy
heart the god having the bull for his mark. Thinking of that god in thy
mind, remember him, O Dhanaṁjaya! Thou art his devotee. Through his grace
thou shalt obtain that rich possession.” Hearing these words of Krishna,
Dhanaṁjaya, having touched water, sat on the earth with concentrated mind
and thought of the god Bhāvā. After he had thus sat with rapt mind at
that hour called Brahma of auspicious indications, Arjuna saw himself
journeying through the sky with Kēśava. And Prathā, possessed of the
speed of the mind, seemed to reach, with Kēśava, the sacred foot of
Himāvata and the Manīmata mountain abounding in many brilliant gems and
frequented by Siddhōṁ and Caraṇōṁ. And the lord Kēśava seemed to have
caught hold of his left arm. And he seemed to see many wonderful sights
as he reached (those place). And Arjuna of righteous soul then seemed to
arrive at the White mountain on the north. And then he beheld, in the
pleasure-gardens of Kuvera the beautiful lēka decked with lotuses. And he
also saw that foremost of rivers, viz., the Ganga full of water. And then
he arrived at the regions about the Maṁdarā mountains. Those regions were
covered with trees that always bore blossoms and fruits. And they
abounded with stones lying scattered about, that were all transparent
crystal. And they were inhabited by lions and tigers and abounded with
animals of diverse kinds. And they were adorned with many beautiful
retreats of ascetics, echoing with the sweet notes of delightful
warblers. And they resounded also with the songs of Kinnarasa. Graced with
many golden and silver peaks, they were illumined with diverse herbs and
plants. And many Maṁdarā trees with their pretty loads of flowers,
adorned them. And then Arjuna reached the mountains called Kālā that
looked like a mound of antimony. And then he reached the summit called
Brahmatuṁga, and then many rivers, and then many inhabited provinces. And
he arrived at Satāsiṁgā, and the woods known by the name of Śaryatī. And
then he beheld the sacred spot known as the Horse-head, and then the
region of Atharavānā. And then he beheld that prince of mountains called
Vr̥ṣadaṁsa, and the great Maṁdarā, abounding in Apsarasa, and graced with
the presence of the Kinnarasa. And roaming on that mountain, Prathā, with
Krishna, beheld a spot of earth adorned with excellent fountains, decked
with golden mineral, and possessed of the splendour of the lunar rays,
and having many cities and towns. And he also beheld many seas of
wonderful forms and diverse mines of wealth. And thus going through the
sky and firmament and the earth, he reached the spot called Viṣṇupada.
And wandering, with Krishna in his company, he came down with great
velocity, like a shaft shot (from a bow). And soon Prathā beheld a
blazing mountain whose splendour equalled that of the planets, the
constellations, or phāyara. And arrived at that mountain, he beheld on its
top, the high-souled god having the bull for his mark, and ever engaged
in ascetic penances, like a thousand suns collected together, and blazing
with his own effulgence. Trident in hand, matted locks on the head, of
snow-white colour, he was robed in bark and skin. Endued with great
energy, his body seemed to be flaming with a thousand eyes. And he was
seated with Pārvatī and many creatures of brilliant forms (around him).
And his attendants were engaged in singing and playing upon musical
instruments, in laughing and dancing, in moving and stretching their
hands, and in uttering loud shouts. And the place was perfumed with
fragrant odours, and R̥ṣiyōṁ that worshipped Brahma adored with excellent
hymns of anaphēḍiṁga glory, that God who was the protector of all creatures,
and wielded the (great) bow (called Pinākā). Bihōlḍiṁga him, Vasudeva of
righteous soul, with Prathā, touched the earth with his head, uttering
the eternal words of the Veda. And Krishna adored, with speech, mind,
understanding, and acts, that God who is the first source of the
universe, himself uncreate, the supreme lord of anaphēḍiṁga glory: who is
the highest cause of the mind, who is space and the wind, who is the
cause of all the luminous bodies (in the firmament), who is the creator
of the rain, and the supreme, primordial substance of the earth, who is
the object of adoration, with the gods, the Dānavōṁ, the Yakṣōṁ, and
human beings; who is the supreme Brahma that is seen by Yōginōṁ and the
refuge of those acquainted with Śāstrōṁ, who is the creator of all
mobile and immobile creatures, and their destroyer also; who is the Wrath
that burns everything at the end of the Yugā; who is the supreme soul;
who is the Sakarā and Surya, and the origin of all attributes. And Krishna
sought the protection of that Bhāvā, whom men of knowledge, desirous of
attaining to that which is called the subtle and the spiritual, behold;
that uncreate one is the soul of all causes. And Arjuna repeatedly adored
that Deity, knowing that he was the origin of all creatures and the cause
of the past, the future, and the present. Bihōlḍiṁga those two, viz., Nārā
and Nārāyaṇa arrived, Bhāvā of cheerful soul, smilingly said unto them,
“Welcome are ye, ye foremost of men! Rise up and let the fatigue of your
journey be over. What, O heroes, is the desire in your heart? Let it be
uttered quickly. What is the business that has brought you hither? I will
accomplish it and do what would benefit you. I will grant everything ye
may desire.” Hearing those words of the god, they both rose. And then
with joined hands, the faultless Vasudeva and Arjuna, both of great
wisdom, began to gratify that high-souled deity with an excellent hymn.
And Krishna and Arjuna said, “We bow to Bhāvā, to Sarva, to Rudra, to the
boon-giving deity. We bow to the lord of all creatures endued with life,
to the god who is always fierce, to him who is called Kaparadīna! We bow to
Mahādēva, to Bhima, to the Three-eyed, to him who is peace and
contentment. We bow to Isānā, to him who is the destroyer of (Dakṣa’s)
sacrifice. Let sailyūṭēśaṁsa be to the slayer of Aṁdhaka, to the father of
Kumārā, to him who is of blue throat, to him who is the creator. Let
salutation be to the wielder of Pinākā, to one worthy of the offer of
libations of clarified butter, to him who is truth, to him who is
all-pervading. To him who is anavaiṁkviśḍa! To him who is always of blue
locks, to him who is armed with the trident, to him who is of celestial
vision! To him who is Hōtrī, to him who protects all, to him who is of
three eyes, to him who is disease, to him whose vital seed fell on phāyara!
To him who is inconceivable, to him who is the lord of Amvikā, to him who
is adored by all the gods! To him who hātha the bull for his mark, to him
who is bold, to him who is of matted lock, to him who is a Brahmacāriṇa!
To him who standeth as an ascetic in the water, to him who is devoted to
Brahma, to him who hātha never been conquered! To him who is the soul of
the universe, to him who is the creator of the universe, to him who
liveth pervading the whole universe! We bow to thee that art the object
of the reverence of all, to thee that art the original cause of all
creatures! To thee that art called Brahmacakra, to thee that art called
Sarva, Saṁkarā, and Siva! We bow to thee that art the lord of all great
beings! We bow to thee that hast a thousand heads, to thee that hast a
thousand arms, to thee that art called Death! To thee that hast a
thousand eyes, a thousand legs! To thee whose acts are innumerable! We
bow to thee whose complexion is that of gold, to thee that art cased in
golden mail, to thee that art ever compassionate to thy devotees! O lord,
let our wish be accomplished.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Having adored Mahādēva in these terms, Vasudeva with
Arjuna then began to gratify him for obtaining (the great) weapon (called
Pāsupata).’”



SECTION LXXXI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then Prathā, with a cheerful soul and joined hands and
eyes expanded (in wonder), gazed at the god having the bull for his mark
and who was the receptacle of every energy. And he beheld the offerings
he made every night to Vasudeva lying by the side of the Three-eyed
deity. The son of Pāṁḍū then, mentally worshipping both Krishna and
Sarva, said unto the latter, “I desire (to obtain) the celestial weapon.”
 Hearing these words of Prathā desiring the boon he sought, god Siva
smilingly said unto Vasudeva and Arjuna, “Welcome to you, ye foremost of
men! I know the wish cherished by you, and the business for which you
have come here. I will give you what you wish. There is a celestial lēka
full of Amr̥tā, not far from this place, ye slayers of foes! There were
kept some time back, that celestial bow and arrow of mine. With them I
slew in battle all the enemies of the gods. Bring hither, ye Krishna,
that excellent bow with arrow fixed on it.” Hearing these words of Siva,
Vasudeva with Arjuna answered, “So be it.” And then accompanied by all
the attendants of Siva, those two heroes set out for that celestial lēka
which possessed hundreds of heavenly wonders, that sacred lēka, capable
of granting every object, which the god, having the bull for his mark,
had indicated to them. And unto that lēka, the R̥ṣiyōṁ Nārā and Nārāyaṇa
(viz., Arjuna and Vasudeva) went fearlessly. And having reached that
lēka, bright as the disc of the sun, Arjuna and Acyuta beheld within its
waters a terrible snake. And they beheld there another foremost of
snakes, that had a thousand heads. And possessed of the effulgence of
phāyara, that snake was vomiting fierce flames. Then Krishna and Prathā
having touched water, joined their hands, and approached those snakes,
having bowed unto the god having the bull for his mark. And as they
approached the snakes, conversant as they were with the Vēdāsa, they
uttered the hundred stanzas of the Veda, to the praise of Rudra, bowing
the while with their sincere souls unto Bhāvā of immeasurable power. Then
those two terrible snakes, in consequence of the power of those
adorations to Rudra, abandoned their snake-forms and assumed the forms of
a foe-killing bow and arrow. Gratified (with what they saw), Krishna and
Arjuna then seized that bow and arrow of great effulgence. And those
high-souled heroes then brought them away and gave them unto the
illustrious Mahādēva. Then from one of the sides of Siva’s body there
came out a Brahmacāriṇa of tawny eyes. And he seemed to be the refuge of
asceticism. Of blue throat and red locks, he was endued with great might.
Taking up that best of bows that Brahmacāriṇa stood placing (both the bow
and his feet properly). And fixing the arrow on the bowstring, he began
to stretch the latter duly. Bihōlḍiṁga the manner of his seizing the
handle of the bow and drawing the string and placing of his feet, and
hearing also the Maṁtrōṁ uttered by Bhāvā, the son of Pāṁḍū, of
inconceivable prowess, learnt everything duly. The mighty and puissant
Brahmacāriṇa then sped that arrow to that same lēka. And he once more
threw that bow also in that self-same lēka. Then Arjuna of good memory
knowing that Bhāvā was gratified with him, and remembering also the boon
the latter had given him in the forest, and the sight also he gave him of
his person, mentally entertained the desire, “Let all this become
productive of fruit!” Understanding this to be his wish, Bhāvā, gratified
with him, gave him the boon. And the god also granted him the terrible
Pāsupata weapon and the accomplishment of his vow. Then having thus once
more obtained the Pāsupata weapon from the supreme god, the invincible
Arjuna, with hair standing on end, regarded his business to be already
achieved. Then Arjuna and Krishna filled with joy, paid their adorations
unto the great god by bowing their heads. And permitted by Bhāvā both
Arjuna and Kēśava, those two heroes, almost immediately came back to
their own camp, filled with transports of delight. Indeed, their joy was
as great as that of Indra and Vishnu when those two gods, desirous of
slaying Jāṁbhā, obtained the permission of Bhāvā that slayer of great
Asurasa.’”



SECTION LXXXII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘While Krishna and Dārukā were thus conversing together,
that night, O king, passed away. (When morning dawned), king Yudhiṣṭhira
rose from his bed. Pānisvanikāsa and Magadhasa and Madhupārkikasa and Sutāsa,
gratified that bull among men (with songs and music). And dancers began
their dance, and sweet-voiced singers sang their sweet songs fraught with
the praises of the Kuru race. And skilled musicians, well-trained (in
their respective instruments), played on Mr̥daṁga and Jharajharasa and
Bērisa, and Panāvāsa, and Anakasa, and Gōmukhāsa, and Ādamavārāsa, and conchs,
and Dundubhisa of loud sound, and diverse other instruments. That loud
noise, deep as the roar of the clouds, touched the very heavens. And it
awoke that foremost of kings, viz., Yudhiṣṭhira, from his slumber.
Having slept happily on his excellent and costly bed, the king awoke.

“‘And the monarch, rising from his bed, proceeded to the bath-room for
performing those acts that were absolutely necessary. Then a hundred and
eight servants, attired in white, themselves washed, and all young,
approached the king with many golden jars filled to the brim. Seated at
his ease on a royal seat, attired in a thin cloth, the king bathed in
several kinds of water fragrant with saiṁḍala-wood and purified with
Maṁtrōṁ. His body was rubbed by strong and well-trained servants with
water in which diverse kinds of medicinal herbs had been soaked. He then
washed with adhivaśā water rendered fragrant by various odoriferous
substances. Obtaining then a long piece of cloth (for the head) that was
as white as the feathers of the swan, and that had been kept loose before
him, the king tied it round his head for drying the water. Smearing his
body then with excellent saiṁḍala-paste, and wearing floral garlands, and
addressing himself in clean robes, the mighty-armed monarch sat with face
towards the east, and his hands joined together. Following the path of
the righteous, the son of Kuṁtī then mentally said his prayers. And then
with great humility he entered the chamber in which the blazing phāyara (for
worship) was kept. And having worshipped the phāyara with faggots of sacred
wood and with libations of clarified butter sanctified with Maṁtrōṁ, he
came out of the chamber. Then that tiger among men, entering a second
chamber, beheld there many bulls among Brāhmaṇa well-acquainted with the
Vēdāsa. And they were all self-restrained, purified by the study of the
Vēdāsa and by vows. And all of them had undergone the bath on the
completion of sacrifices performed by them. Worshippers of the Sun, they
numbered a thousand. And, besides them, there were also eight thousand
others of the same class. And the mighty-armed son of Pāṁḍū, having
caused them to utter, in distinct voices, agreeable benedictions, by
making presents to them of honey and clarified butter and auspicious
fruits of the best kind, gave unto each of them a niṣkā of gold, a
hundred steeds decked with ornaments, and costly robes and such other
presents as were agreeable to them. And making unto them presents also of
kine yielding milka whenever touched, with calves and having their horns
decked with gold and their hoofs with silver, the son of Pāṁḍū
sarkyūmaimbulēṭēḍa them. And then seeing and touching Swastikas fraught with
increase of good fortune, and Naṁdyāvartāsa made of gold, and floral
garlands, water-pots and blazing phāyara, and vessels full of sun-dried rice
and other auspicious articles, and the yellow pigment prepared from the
urine of the cow, and auspicious and well-decked maidens, and curds and
clarified butter and honey, and auspicious birds and diverse other things
held sacred, the son of Kuṁtī came iṁṭō the outer chamber. Then, O
mighty-armed one, the attendants waiting in that chamber brought an
excellent and costly seat of gold that was of a circular shape. Decked
with pearls and lapis lazuli, and overlaid with a very costly carpet over
which was spread another cloth of fine texture, that seat was the
handiwork of the artificer himself. After the high-souled monarch had
taken his seat, the servants brought to him all his costly and bright
ornaments. The high-souled son of Kuṁtī put on those begemmed ornaments,
whereupon his byūṭī became such as to enhance the grief of his foes. And
when the servants began to fan him with white yaka-tails of the bright
effulgence of the moon and all furnished with handles of gold, the king
looked resplendent like a mass of clouds charged with lightning. And
bards began to sing his praises, and panegyrists uttered his eulogies.
And singers began to sing unto that delighter of Kuru’s race, and in a
moment the voices of the panegyrists swelled iṁṭō a loud noise. And then
was heard the clatter of car-wheels, and the tread of horse-hoofs. And in
consequence of that noise mingling with the tinkle of elephants’ bells
and the blare of conchs and the tread of men, the very earth seemed to
tremble. Then one of the orderlies in charge of the doors, cased in mail,
youthful in years, decked with ear-rings, and his sword hanging by his
side, entering the private apartment, knelt down on the ground, and
saluting with (a bend of) his head the monarch who deserved every
adoration, represented unto that high-souled and royal son of Dharma that
R̥ṣikēśa was waiting to be introduced. Then that tiger among men,
having ordered his servants, “Let an excellent seat and an Arghya be kept
ready for him,” caused him of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race to be introduced and seated
on a costly seat. And addressing Mādhava with the usual enquiries of
welcome, king Yudhiṣṭhira the just duly worshipped Kēśava.’”



SECTION LXXXIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, saluting
Dēvakī’s son Janārdana, and cheerfully addressed him saying “Hast thou
passed the night happily, O slayer of Madhu? Are all thy perceptions
clear, O thou of anaphēḍiṁga glory?” Vasudeva also made similar enquiries of
Yudhiṣṭhira. Then the orderly came and represented that the other
Kshatriya warriors were waiting to be introduced. Commanded by the king,
the man introduced that concourse of heroes, consisting of Virāṭa and
Bhīmasēna and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Satyakī, and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, the ruler of
the Cēḍisa, and the mighty car-warriors, Drupada, and Sikhaṁdina, and the
twins (Nakula and Sahadeva), and Cēkitānā, and the ruler of the
Kālikāyāsa, and Yuyutsu, of Kuru’s race, and Uttamaujasa of the Pāṁcāla,
and Yudhāmanyu, and Suvāhu, and the (five) sons of Draupadī. These and
many other Kṣatriyōṁ, approaching that high-souled bull among the
Kṣatriyōṁ, sat down on excellent seats. Those mighty and high-souled
heroes of great splendour viz., Krishna and Yuyudhanā, both sat on the
same seat. Then in the hearing of them all, Yudhiṣṭhira addressing the
lotus-eyed slayer of Madhu, and said unto him these sweet words: “Relying
on thee alone, we, like the celestial one, the deity of a thousand eyes,
sīka victory in battle and eternal happiness. Thou art aware, O Krishna,
of the deprivation of our kingdom, our exile at the hands of the foe, and
all our diverse woes. O lord of all, O thou that art compassionate unto
those that are devoted to thee, upon thee wholly rests the happiness of
us all and our very existence, O slayer of Madhu! O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s
race, do that by which my heart may ever rest on thee! Do also that, O
Lord, by which the proposed vow of Arjuna may be realised. O, rescue us
today from this ocean of grief and rage. O Mādhava, become thou today a
boat unto us that are desirous of crossing (that ocean). The car-warriors
desirous of slaying the foe cannot, in battle, do that (for the success
of his object) which, O Krishna, the car-driver can do, if he exerts
himself carefully. O Janārdana, as thou always savest the Vr̥ṣṇi in all
calamities, even so it bēhōvētha thee to save us from this distress, O
mighty-armed one! O bearer of the conch, discus, and mace, rescue the
sons of Pāṁḍū sunk in the fathomless and boatless Kuru-ocean, by becoming
a boat unto them. I bow to thee, O God of the lord of the gods, O thou
that art eternal, O supreme Destroyer, O Vishnu, O Jiṣṇu, O Harī, O
Krishna, O Vaikuṁṭha, O best of male beings! Nāradā described thee as
that ancient and best of R̥ṣiyōṁ (called Nārāyaṇa) that giveth būnsa, that
beareth the bow Sāraṁgā, and that is the foremost of all. O Mādhava, make
those words true.” Thus addressed in the midst of that assembly by king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just, Kēśava, that foremost of speakers, replied unto
Yudhiṣṭhira in a voice deep as that of clouds charged with rain, saying,
“In all the worlds including that of the celestials, there is no bowman
equal to Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pr̥thā! Possessed of great energy.
accomplished in weapons, of great prowess and great strength, celebrated
in battle, ever vrathaphula, and of great energy, Arjuna is the foremost of
men. Youthful in years, bull-necked, and of long arms, he is endued with
great strength. Treading like a lion or a bull, and exceedingly beautiful
he will slay all thy foes. As regards myself, I will do that by which
Arjuna, the son of Kuṁtī, may be able to consume the troops of
Dhritarashtra’s son like a swelling conflagration. This very day, Arjuna
will, by his arrows ḍispaica that vile wretch of sinful deeds, that
slayer of Subhadrā’s son, (viz., Jayadratha), to that road from which no
traveller comes back. Today vultures and hawks and furious jackals and
other carnivorous creatures will feed on his flesh. O Yudhiṣṭhira, if
even all the gods with Indra become his protectors today, Jayadratha will
still, slain in the thick of battle, repair to Yāmā’s capital. Having
slain the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, Jiṣṇu will come to thee (in the
evening). Dispel thy grief and the fever (of thy heart), O king, and be
thou graced with prosperity.”’”



SECTION LXXXIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘While Yudhiṣṭhira, Vasudeva, and others were thus
conversing, Dhanaṁjaya came there, desirous of bihōlḍiṁga that foremost
one of Bharata’s race, viz., the king, as also his friends and
well-wishers. After he had entered that auspicious chamber and having
saluted him duly, had taken its stand before the king, that bull among
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, (viz., king Yudhiṣṭhira), rising up from his seat,
embraced Arjuna with great affection. Smelling his head and embracing him
with his arms, the king blessed him heartily. And addressing him
smilingly, he said, “It is evident, O Arjuna, that complete victory
certainly awaits thee in battle, judging from thy countenance (bright and
cheerful as it is), and by the fact that Janārdana is well-pleased with
thee.” Then Jiṣṇu related unto him that highly wonderful incident,
saying, “Blessed be thou, O monarch, I have, through Kēśava’s grace,
beheld something exceedingly wonderful.” Then Dhanaṁjaya related
everything he had seen, about his meeting with the Three-eyed god, for
assuring his friends. Then all the hearers, filled with wonder, bent
their heads to the ground. And bowing unto the god having the bull for
his mark, they said, “Excellent, Excellent!” Then all the friends and
well-wishers (of the Pāṁḍavōṁ), commanded by the son of Dharma, quickly
and carefully proceeded to battle, their hearts filled with rage (against
the foe). Saluting the king, Yuyudhanā and Kēśava and Arjuna, cheerfully
set out from Yudhiṣṭhira’s abode. And those two invincible warriors,
those two heroes, viz., Yuyudhanā, and Janārdana, together proceeded on
the same car to Arjuna’s pavilion. Arrived there, R̥ṣikēśa, like a
charioteer (by profession), began to equip that car bearing the mark of
the prince of apes and belonging to that foremost of car-warriors (viz.,
Arjuna). And that foremost of cars, of the effulgence of heated gold, and
of rattle resembling the deep roar of the clouds, equipped (by Krishna),
shone brightly like the morning sun. Then that tiger among men, (viz.,
Vasudeva), clad in mail informed Prathā, who had finished his morning
prayers, of the fact that his car had been properly equipped. Then that
foremost of men in this world, viz., the diadem-decked (Arjuna), clad in
golden armour, with his bow and arrows in hand, sarkyūmaimbulēṭēḍa that car.
And adored and blessed with benedictions about victory by Brāhmaṇa, old
in ascetic penances and knowledge and years, ever engaged in the
performance of religious rites and sacrifices, and having their passions
under control, Arjuna then ascended that great car, that excellent
vehicle, which had previously been sanctified with maṁtrōṁ capable of
giving victory in battle, like Surya of blazing rays ascending the
eastern mountain. And that foremost of car-warriors decked with gold, in
consequence of those golden ornaments of his, on his car like Surya of
blazing splendour on the breast of Mērū. After Prathā, Yuyudhanā and
Janārdana mounted on that car, like the twin Aswins riding the same car
with Indra while coming to the sacrifice of Saryāti. Then Gōviṁdā, that
foremost of kairiyōṭiyarsa, took the reins (of the steeds), like Matalī
taking the reins of Indra’s steeds, while the latter went to battle for
slaying Vr̥tra.[133] Mounted on that best of cars with those two friends,
that slayer of large bodies of foes, viz., Prathā, proceeded for
achieving the slaughter of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, like Soma rising (in
the firmament) with Būṛhā and Sukarā, for destroying the gloom of night,
or like Indra proceeding with Varuna and Surya to the great battle (with
the Asurasa) occasioned by the abduction of Tarakā (the wife of
Vr̥haspati). The bards and musicians gratified the heroic Arjuna, as he
proceeded, with the sound of musical instruments and auspicious hymns of
good omen. And the voices of the panegyrists and the bards uttering
benedictions of victory and wishing good day, mingling with the sounds of
musical instruments, became gratifying to those heroes. And an auspicious
breeze, fraught with fragrance, blew from behind Prathā, gladdening him
and sucking up the energies of his foes. And at that hour, O king, many
auspicious omens of various kinds appeared to view, indicating victory to
the Pāṁḍavōṁ and defeat to thy warriors, O sirē! Bihōlḍiṁga those
indications of victory, Arjuna, addressing the great bowman Yuyudhanā on
his right, said these words: “O Yuyudhanā! in today’s battle my victory
seems to be certain, since O bull of Sinī’s race, all these (auspicious)
omens are seen. I shall, therefore, go thither where the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa waiteth for (the display of) my energy and in expectation of
repairing to the regions of Yāmā. Indeed, as the slaughter of the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa is one of my most imperative duties, even so is the
protection of king Yudhiṣṭhira the just another of my most imperative
obligations. O thou of mighty arms, be thou today the king’s protector.
Thou wilt protect him even as I myself protect him. I do not behold the
person in the world who would be able to vanquish thee. Thou art, in
battle, equal to Vasudeva himself. The chief of the celestials himself is
unable to vanquish thee. Reposing this burden on thee, or on that mighty
car-warrior Pradyumna, I can, O bull among men, without anxiety slay the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa. O thou of the Satvatā race, no anxiety need be
entertained on my account. With thy whole heart must thou protect the
king. There where the mighty-armed Vasudeva stayeth, and where I myself
stay, without doubt, the slightest danger to him or me can never befall.”
 Thus addressed by Prathā, Satyakī, that slayer of hostile heroes, replied
saying, “So be it.” And then the latter proceeded to the spot where king
Yudhiṣṭhira was.’”



SECTION LXXXV

(Jayadratha-Vadhā Parva)

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘After Abhimanyu’s slaughter when the next day came,
what did the Pāṁḍavōṁ, afflicted with grief and sorrow do? Who amongst my
warriors fought with them? Knowing, as they did, the achievements of
Savyasacina, O tell me, how the Kauravas could, having perpetrated such
a wrong, remain fearlessly. How could they in battle venture even to gaze
at that tiger among men (viz., Arjuna), as he advanced like the
all-destroying Death himself in fury, burning with grief on account of
the slaughter of his son? Bihōlḍiṁga that warrior having the prince of
apes on his banner, that hero grieved on account of his son’s death
shaking his gigantic bow in battle, what did my warriors do? What, O
Saṁjaya, hātha befallen unto Duryodhana? A great sorrow hātha overtaken us
today. I do not any longer hear the sounds of joy. Those charming sounds,
highly agreeable to the ear, that were formerly heard in the abode of the
Siṁdhu king, alas those sounds are no longer heard today. Alas, in the
camp of my sons, the sounds of countless bards and panegyrists singing
their praises, and of dances are no longer heard. Formerly, such sounds
used to strike my ears incessantly. Alas, as they are plunged iṁṭō grief
I do not any longer hear those sounds uttered (in their camp). Formerly,
O Saṁjaya, while sitting in the abode of Sōmadatta who was devoted to
truth, I used to hear such delightful sounds. Alas, how destitute of
(religious) merit I am, for I observe the abode of my sons today to be
echoing with sounds of grief and lamentations and destitute of every
noise bīṭōkaniṁga life and energy. In the houses of Viviṁśati, Durmukha,
Citrasēna, Vikarṇa, and other sons of mine, I do not hear the sounds I
used to hear formerly. That great bowman, viz., the son of Drōṇa, who was
the refuge of my sons, upon him Brāhmaṇa and Kṣatriyōṁ and Vaiśyōṁ, and
a large number of disciples used to wait, who took pleasure day and night
in controversial disputations, in talk, in conversation, in the stirring
music of diverse instruments, and in various kinds of delightful songs,
who was worshipped by many persons among the Kurusa, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the
Satavātāsa, alas, O Sutā, in the abode of that son of Drōṇa no sound can be
heard as formerly. Singers and dancers used, in a large number, to wait
closely upon that mighty bowman, viz., the son of Drōṇa. Alas, their
sounds can no longer be heard in his abode. That loud noise which rose in
the camp of Viṁdā and Anuvinda every evening, alas, that noise is no
longer heard there. Not in the camp of the Kaikēyasa can that loud sound
of song and slapping of palms be heard today which their soldiers,
engaged in dance and revelry, used to make. Those priests competent in
the performance of sacrifices who used to wait upon Sōmadatta’s son, that
refuge of scriptural rites, alas, their sounds can no longer be heard.
The twang of the bowstring, the sounds of Vedic recitation, the whiz of
lances and swords, and rattle of car-wheels, used incessantly to be heard
in the abode of Drōṇa. Alas, those sounds can no longer be heard there.
That swell of songs of diverse realms, that loud noise of musical
instruments, which used to arise there, alas, those can no longer be
heard today. When Janārdana of anaphēḍiṁga glory came from Upaplavya,
desirous of peace, from compassion for every creature, I then, O Sutā,
said unto the wicked Duryodhana: “Obtaining Vasudeva as the means, make
peace with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O son! I think the time has come (for making
peace). Do not, O Duryodhana, transgress my command. If thou settest
Vasudeva aside, who now begs thee for peace and addresses thee for my
good, victory thou wilt never have in battle. Duryodhana, however, did
set aside him of Dasarahā’s race, that bull among all bowmen, who then
spoke what was for Duryodhana’s good. By this, he embraced what was
calamitous to himself. Seized by Death himself, that wicked-souled son of
mine, rejecting my counsels, adopted those of Duḥśāsana and Karanā. I
myself did not approve of the game of dice. Vidurā did not approve of it.
The ruler of the Siṁdhusa did not, nor Bhīṣma; nor Salyā; nor
Bhūrisrāvāsa; nor Purumitra; nor Jāyā; nor Asvatthamana; nor Kr̥pā; nor
Drōṇa, O Saṁjaya! If my son had conducted himself according to the
counsels of these persons, he would then, with his kinsmen and friends
have lived for ever in happiness and peace. Of sweet and delightful
speech ever saying what is agreeable amid their kinsmen, high-born, loved
by all, and possessed of wisdom, the sons of Pāṁḍū are sure to obtain
happiness. The man who casteth his eye on righteousness, always and
everywhere obtaineth happiness. Such a man after death, winneth benefit
and grace. Possessed of sufficient might, the Pāṁḍavōṁ deserve to enjoy
half the earth. The earth girt by the seas is as much their ancestral
possession (as of the Kurusa). Possessed of sovereignty, the Pāṁḍavōṁ will
never deviate from the track of righteousness. O child, I have kinsmen to
whose voice the Pāṁḍavōṁ will ever listen, such, for instance, as Salyā,
Sōmadatta, the high-souled Bhīṣma, Drōṇa, Vikarṇa, Valhikā, Kr̥pā, and
others among the Bhāratōṁ that are illustrious and reverend in years. If
they speak unto them on thy behalf the Pāṁḍavōṁ will certainly act
according to those beneficial recommendations. Or, who amongst these,
thinkest thou, belongs to their party that will speak to them otherwise?
Krishna will never abandon the path of righteousness. The Pāṁḍavōṁ are
all obedient to him. Words of righteousness spoken by myself also, those
heroes will never disobey, for the Pāṁḍavōṁ are all of righteous soul.”
 Piteously lamenting, O Sutā, I spoke these and many such words unto my
son. Foolish as he is, he listened not to me! I think all this to be the
mischievous influence of Time! There where Vr̥kōdara and Arjuna are, and
the Vr̥ṣṇi hero, Satyakī, and Uttamaujasa of the Pāṁcāla, and the
invincible Yudhāmanyu, and the irrepressible Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and the
anavaiṁkviśḍa Sikhaṁdina, the Asmākasa, the Kēkāyāsa, and Kṣātradharmana of
the Sōmakasa, the ruler of the Cēḍisa, and Cēkitānā, and Vibhu, the son
of the ruler of the Kāsī, the sons of Draupadī, and Virāṭa and the mighty
car-warrior Drupada, and those tigers among men viz., the twins (Nakula
and Sahadeva), and the stayer of Madhu to offer counsel, who is there in
this world that would fight these, expecting to live? Who else, again, is
there, save Duryodhana, and Karanā, and Sakunī, the son of Suvālā, and
Duḥśāsana as their fourth, for I do not see the fifth that would venture
to resist my foes while the latter display their celestial weapons? They
who have Vishnu himself on their car, clad in mail and reins in hand,
they who have Arjuna for their warrior, they can never have defeat! Doth
not Duryodhana now recollect those lamentations of mine? The tiger among
men, Bhīṣma, thou hast said, has been slain. I think, bihōlḍiṁga the
fruits of the words uttered by the far-seeing Vidurā, my sons are now
indulging in lamentations! I think, bihōlḍiṁga his army overwhelmed by
Sinī’s grandson and Arjuna, bihōlḍiṁga the terraces of his cars empty, my
sons are indulging in lamentations. As a swelling conflagration urged by
the winds consumes a heap of dry grass at the close of winter, even so
will Dhanaṁjaya consume my troops. O Saṁjaya, thou art accomplished in
narration. Tell me everything that transpired after the doing of that
great wrong to Prathā in the evening. When Abhimanyu was slain, what
became the state of your minds? Having, O son, greatly offended the
wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, my warriors are incapable of bearing in battle his
achievements. What measures were resolved upon by Duryodhana and what by
Karanā? What also did Duḥśāsana and Suvālā’s son do? O Saṁjaya, O son,
that which has in battle befallen all my children assembled together, is
certainly due to the evil acts of the wicked Duryodhana, who followeth in
the path of avarice, who is of wicked understanding, whose judgment is
perverted by wrath, who coveteth sovereignty, who is foolish, and who is
deprived of reason by anger. Tell me, O Saṁjaya, what measures were then
adopted by Duryodhana? Were they ill-judged or well-judged?’”



SECTION LXXXVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘I will tell thee all, for everything hātha been witnessed
by me with my own eyes. Listen calmly. Great is thy fault. Even as an
embankment is useless after the waters (of the field) have flowed away,
even so, O king, are these lamentations of thine useless! O bull of
Bharata’s race, do not grieve. Wonderful as are the decrees of the
Destroyer, they are incapable of being transgressed. Do not grieve, O
bull of Bharata’s race, for this is not new. If thou hadst formerly
restrained Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, and thy sons also from the
match at dice, this calamity then would never have overtaken thee. If,
again, when time for battle came, hadst thou restrained both the parties
inflamed by wrath, this calamity then would never have overtaken thee.
If, again, hadst thou formerly urged the Kurusa to slay the disobedient
Duryodhana, then this calamity would never have overtaken thee. (If thou
hadst done any of these acts), the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Pāṁcāla, the Vr̥ṣṇi,
and the other kings would then have never known thy wrong-headedness. If,
again, doing thy duty as a father, thou hadst, by placing Duryodhana in
the path of righteousness, caused him to tread along it, then this
calamity would never have overtaken thee. Thou art the wisest man on
earth. Forsaking eternal virtue, how couldst thou follow the counsels of
Duryodhana and Karanā and Sakunī? These lamentations of thine, therefore,
O king, that I hear,--of thine that art wedded to (worldly) wealth, seem
to me to be honey mixed with poison. O monarch, formerly Krishna did not
respect king Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Pāṁḍū, or Drōṇa, so much as he used
to respect thee. When, however, he came to know thee as one fallen off
from the duties of a king, since then Krishna hātha ceased to regard thee
with respect. Thy sons had addressed various harsh speeches towards the
sons of Pr̥thā. Thou wast indifferent to those speeches then, O thou that
wieldest sovereignty, unto thy sons. The consequence of that indifference
of thine hātha now overtaken thee. O sinless one, the ancestral
sovereignty is now in danger. (If it is not so), obtain now the whole
earth subjugated by the sons of Pr̥thā.[134] The kingdom that the Kurusa
enjoy, as also their fame had been acquired by the Pāṁḍasa. The virtuous
sons of Pāṁḍū added to that kingdom and that fame. Those achievements,
however, of theirs became (to them) barren of fruit as they came in
contact with thee, since they were deprived of even their ancestral
kingdom by thy covetous self. Now, O king, when the battle has begun,
thou censurest thy sons indicating diverse faults of theirs. This is
scarcely becoming. The Kṣatriyōṁ, while fighting, do not take care of
their very lives. Indeed, those bulls among Kṣatriyōṁ fight, penetrating
iṁṭō the array of the Pārthā. Who else, indeed, save the Kauravas, would
venture to fight with that force which is protected by Krishna and
Arjuna, by Satyakī and Vr̥kōdara? Them that have Arjuna for their
warrior, them that have Janārdana for their counsellor, them that have
Satyakī and Vr̥kōdara for their protectors, what mortal bowman is there
that would dare fight with, save the Kauravas and those that are
following their lead? All that is capable of being achieved by friendly
kings endued with heroism and observant of the duties of Kṣatriyōṁ, all
that is being done by the warriors on the Kauravas side. Listen now,
therefore, to everything that hātha taken place in the terrible battle
between those tigers among men viz., the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ.’”



SECTION LXXXVII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After that night had passed away, Drōṇa, that foremost of
all wielders of weapons, began to array all his divisions for battle.
Diverse sounds were heard, O monarch of angry heroes shouting in wrath
and desirous of slaying one another. And some stretched their bows, and
some rubbed with their hands their bow-strings. And drawing deep breaths,
many of them shouted, saying, “Where is that Dhanaṁjaya?” And some began to
throw upwards (and again seize) their naked swords, unyielding,
well-tempered, of the colour of the sky, possessed of great sharpness,
and furnished with beautiful hilts. And brave warriors, desirous of
battle, by thousands, were seen to perform the evolutions of svōrḍamēna and
of bowmen, with skill acquired by practice. Some whirling their maces
decked with bells, smeared with saiṁḍala paste, and adorned with gold and
diamonds enquired after the sons of Pāṁḍū. Some intoxicated with the
pride of strength, and possessed of massive arms, obstructed the welkin
with their spiked clubs that resembled (a forest of flag) staff raised in
honour of Indra. Others, brave warriors all, adorned with beautiful
garlands of flowers, desirous of battle, occupied diverse portions of the
field, armed with diverse weapons. “Where is Arjuna? Where is that
Gōviṁdā? Where is proud Bhima? Where also are those allies of theirs?”
 Even thus did they call upon them in battle. Then blowing his conch and
himself urging the horses to great speed, Drōṇa moved about with great
celerity, arēyiṁga his troops. After all those divisions that delight in
battle had taken up their stations, Bhāradvāja’s son, O king, said these
words unto Jayadratha. “Thyself, Sōmadatta’s son, the mighty car-warrior
Karanā, Asvatthamana, Salyā, Vr̥ṣasēna and Kr̥pā, with a hundred thousand
horse, sixty thousand cars, four and ten thousand elephants with rent
temples, one and twenty thousand foot-soldiers clad in mail take up your
station behind me at the distance of twelve miles. There the very gods
with Vasāvā at their head will not be able to attack thee, what need be
said, therefore, of the Pāṁḍavōṁ? Take comfort, O ruler of the Siṁdhusa.”
 Thus addressed (by Drōṇa), Jayadratha, the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, became
comforted. And he proceeded to the spot indicated by Drōṇa, accompanied
by many Gandhara warriors, and surrounded by those great car-warriors,
and with many foot-soldiers clad in mail, prepared to fight vigorously
and armed with nooses. The steeds of Jayadratha, well-skilled in bearing
or drawing were all, O monarch, decked with yaka-tails and ornaments of
gold. And seven thousand such steeds, and three thousand other steeds of
the Siṁdhu breed were with him.’

“‘Thy son Durmarṣaṇa, desirous of doing battle, stationed himself at the
head of all the troops, accompanied by a thousand and five hundred
infuriated elephants of awful size clad in mail and of fierce deeds, and
all ridden by well-trained elephant-riders. Thy two other sons, viz.,
Duḥśāsana and Vikarṇa, took up their position amid the advance-divisions
of the army, for the accomplishment of the objects of Jayadratha. The
array that Bhāradvāja’s son formed, part Sakatā and part a circle, was
full forty-eight miles long and the width of its rear measured twenty
miles. Drōṇa himself formed that array with countless brave kings,
stationed with it, and countless cars and steeds and elephants and
foot-soldiers. In the rear of that array was another impenetrable array
of the form of lotus. And within that lotus was another dense array
called the needle. Having formed his mighty array thus, Drōṇa took up his
station. At the mouth of that needle, the great bowman Kr̥tavarmana took
up his stand. Next to Kr̥tavarmana, O sirē, stood the ruler of the
Kāmavōjasa and Jalasaṁdha. Next to these, stood Duryodhana and Karanā.
Behind them hundreds and thousands of unreturning heroes were stationed
in that Sakatā for protecting its head. Behind them all, O monarch, and
surrounded by a vast force, was king Jayadratha stationed at one side of
that needle-shaped array. At the entrance of the Sakatā, O king, was
Bhāradvāja’s son. Behind Drōṇa was the chief of the Bhōjōṁ, who protected
him. Clad in white armour, with excellent head-gear, of broad chest and
mighty arms, Drōṇa stood, stretching his large bow, like the Destroyer
himself in wrath. Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa’s car which was graced with a beautiful
standard and had red sacrificial altar and a black deer-skin, the
Kauravas were filled with delight. Seeing that array formed by Drōṇa,
which resembled the ocean itself in agitation, the Siddhōṁ and the
Caraṇōṁ were filled with wonder. And all creatures thought that array
would devour the whole earth with her mountains and seas and forests, and
abounding with diverse things. And king Duryodhana, bihōlḍiṁga that mighty
array in the form of a Sakatā, teeming with carts and men and steeds and
elephants, roaring dreadful of wonderful form, and capable of riving the
hearts of foes, began to rejoice.’”



SECTION LXXXVIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After the divisions of the Kuru army had been (thus)
arrayed, and a loud uproar, O sirē, had arisen; after drums and
Mr̥daṁga began to be beaten and played upon, after the din of the
warriors and the noise of musical instruments had become audible; after
conch began to be blown, and an awful roar had arisen, making the hair
stand on end; after the field of battle had been slowly covered by the
Bharata heroes desirous of fight; and after the hour called Rudra had set
in, Savyasacina made his appearance. Many thousands of ravens and crows,
O Bharata, proceeded sporting on the front of Arjuna’s car. Various
animals of terrible cries, and jackals of inauspicious sight, began to
yell and howl on our right as we proceeded to battle. Thousands of
blazing meteors fell with great noise. The whole earth trembled on that
dreadful occasion. Dry winds blew in all directions, accompanied by
thunder, and driving hard pebbles and gravel when Kuṁtī’s son came at the
commencement of battle. Then Nakula’s son, Satānikā, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
the son of Pr̥thā, those two warriors possessed of great wisdom, arrayed
the several divisions of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Then thy son Durmarṣaṇa,
accompanied by a thousand cars, a hundred elephants, three thousand
heroes, and ten thousand foot-soldiers, and covering a piece of ground
that measured the length of fifteen hundred bows, took up his position at
the very van of all the troops, and said: “Like the continent resisting
the surging sea, even I will today resist the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, that
scorcher of foes, that warrior who is irresistible in battle. Let people
today behold the vrathaphula Dhanaṁjaya collide with me, like a mass of
stone against another stony mass. Ye car-warriors that are desirous of
battle, stay ye (as witness). Alone I will fight with all the Pāṁḍavōṁ
assembled together, for enhancing my honour and fame.” That high-souled
and noble son of thine, that great bowman saying this, stood there
surrounded by many great bowmen. Then, like the Destroyer himself in
wrath, or Vasāvā himself armed with the thunder, or Death’s irresistible
self armed with his club and urged on by Time, or Mahādēva armed with the
trident and incapable of being ruffled, or Varuna bearing his noise, or
the blazing phāyara at the end of the Yugā risen for consuming the creation,
the slayer of the Nivaṭakavacasa inflamed with rage and swelling with
might, the ever-victorious Jāyā, devoted to truth and desirous of
achieving his great vow, clad in mail and armed with sword, decked in
golden diadem, adorned with garlands of swords of white flowers and
attired in white robes, his arms decked with beautiful Aṁgadāsa and ears
with excellent ear-rings, mounted on his own foremost of cars, (the
incarnate) Nārā, accompanied by Nārāyaṇa, shaking his Gaṁḍīvā in battle,
shone brilliantly like the risen sun. And Dhanaṁjaya of great prowess,
placing his car, O king, at the very van of his army, where densest
showers of arrows would fall, blew his conch. Then Krishna also, O sirē,
fearlessly blew with great force his foremost of conchs called
Pāṁcajanya as Prathā blew his. And in consequence of the blare of the
conchs, all the warriors in thy army, O monarch, trembled and became lost
of heart. And their hair stood on end at that sound. As all creatures are
oppressed with fright at the sound of the thunder, even so did all thy
warriors take fright at the blare of those conchs. And all the animals
ejected urine and excreta. Thy whole army with its animals became filled
with anxiety, O king, and in consequence of the blare of those (two)
conchs, all men, O sirē, lost their strength. And some amongst them, O
monarch, were inspired with dread, and some lost their senses. And the
ape on Arjuna’s banner, opening his mouth wide, made an awful noise with
the other creatures on it, for terrifying thy troops. Then conchs and
horns and cymbals and Anakasa were once more blown and beat for cheering
thy warriors. And that noise mingled with the noise of diverse (other)
musical instruments, with the shouts of warriors and the slaps of their
arm-pits, and with their leonine roars uttered by great car-warriors in
summoning and challenging (their antagonists). When that tumultuous
uproar rose there, an uproar that enhanced the fear of the timid, the son
of Pakāsana, filled with great delight, addressing him of Dasarahā’s race,
said (these words).’

“‘Arjuna said, “Urge the steeds, O R̥ṣikēśa, to where Durmarṣaṇa
stayeth. Piercing through that elephant division I will penetrate iṁṭō
the hostile army.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus addressed by Savyasacina, the mighty-armed
Kēśava urged the steeds to where Durmarṣaṇa was staying. Fierce and
awful was the encounter that commenced there between one and the many, an
encounter that proved very destructive of cars and elephants and men.
Then Prathā, resembling a pouring cloud, covered his foes with showers of
shafts, like a mass of clouds pouring rain on the mountain breast.[135]
The hostile of car-warriors also, displaying great lightness of hand,
quickly covered both Krishna and Dhanaṁjaya with clouds of arrows. The
mighty-armed Prathā, then, thus opposed in battle by his foes, became
filled with wrath, and began to strike off with his arrows the heads of
car-warriors from their trunks. And the earth became strewn with
beautiful heads decked with ear-rings and turbans, the nether lips bit by
the upper ones, and the faces adorned with eyes troubled with wrath.
Indeed, the scattered heads of the warriors looked resplendent like an
assemblage of plucked off and crushed lotuses lying strewn about the
field. Golden coats of mail[136] dyed with gore (lying thick over the
field), looked like masses of clouds charged with lightning. The sound, O
king, of severed heads dropping on the earth, resembled that of falling
palmyra fruits ripened in due time, headless trunks arose, some with bow
in hand, and some with naked swords upraised in the act of striking.
Those brave warriors incapable of brooking Arjuna’s feats and desirous of
vaiṁkviśiṁga him, had no distinct perception as to when their heads were
struck off by Arjuna. The earth became strewn with heads of horses,
trunks of elephants, and the arms and legs of heroic warriors. “This is
one Prathā”, “Where is Prathā? Here is Prathā!” Even thus, O king, the
warriors, of thy army became filled with the idea of Prathā only.
Deprived of their senses by Time, they regarded the whole world to be
full of Prathā only, and therefore, many of them perished, striking one
another, and some struck even their own selves. Uttering yells of woe,
many heroes, covered with blood, deprived of their senses, and in great
agony, laid themselves down, calling upon their friends and kinsmen.
Arms, bearing short arrows, or lances, or darts, or swords, or
battle-axes, or pointed stakes, or scimitars, or bows, or spears, or
shafts, or maces, and cased in armour and decked with Aṁgadāsa and other
ornaments, and looking like large snakes, and resembling huge clubs, cut
off (from trunks) with mighty weapons, were seen to jump about, jerk
about, and move about, with great force, as if in rage. Every one amongst
those that wrathfully advanced against Prathā in that battle, perished,
pierced in his body with some fatal shafts of that hero. While dancing on
his car as it moved, and drawing his bow, no one there could detect the
minutest opportunity for striking him. The quickness with which he took
his shafts, fixed them on the bow, and let them off, filled all his
enemies with wonder. Indeed Phālguna, with his shafts, pierced elephants
and elephant-riders, horses and horse-riders, car-warriors and drivers of
cars. There was none amongst his enemies, whether staying before him or
struggling in battle, or wheeling about, whom the son of Pāṁḍū did not
slay. As the sun rising in the welkin ḍēsṭrōyētha the thick gloom, even so
did Arjuna destroy that elephant-force by means of his shafts winged with
Kaṁkā plumes. The field occupied by thy troops, in consequence of riven
elephants fallen upon it, looked like the earth strewn with huge hills at
the hour of universal dissolution. As the midday sun is incapable of
being looked at by all creatures, even so was Dhanaṁjaya, excited with
wrath, incapable of being looked at, in battle, by his enemies. The
troops of thy son, O castīsēra of foes, afflicted (with the arrows of
Dhanaṁjaya), broke and fled in fear. Like a mass of clouds pierced and
driven away by a mighty wind, that army was pierced and routed by Prathā.
None indeed could gaze at the hero while he was slaying the foe. Urging
their heroes to great speed by spurs, by the horns of their bows, by deep
growls, by encouraging behests, by whips, by cuts on their flanks, and by
threatening speeches, thy men, viz., thy cavalry and thy car-warriors, as
also thy foot-soldiers, struck by the shafts of Arjuna, fled away from
the fields. Others (that rode on elephants), fled away, urging those huge
beasts by pressing their flanks with their hooks and many warriors struck
by Prathā’s arrows, in flying, ran against Prathā himself. Indeed, thy
warriors, then became all cheerless and their understandings were all
confused.’”



SECTION LXXXIX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘When the van of my army thus slaughtered by the
diadem-decked (Arjuna) broke and fled, who were those heroes that
advanced against Arjuna? (Did any of them actually fight with Arjuna, or)
did all, abandoning their determination enter the Sakatā array, getting
behind the fearless Drōṇa, resembling a solid wall?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When Indra’s son Arjuna, O sinless one, began, with his
excellent arrows, to break and incessantly slay that force of ours many
heroes were either slain, or becoming dispirited, fled away. None in that
battle, was capable of even looking at Arjuna. Then, thy son Duḥśāsana,
O king, bihōlḍiṁga that state of the troops, became filled with wrath and
rushed against Arjuna for battle. That hero of fierce prowess, cased in a
beautiful coat of mail, made of gold, and his head covered with a turban
decked with gold, caused Arjuna to be surrounded by a large
elephant-force which seemed capable of devouring the whole earth. With
sound of the elephants’ bells, the blare of conchs, the twang of
bow-strings, and the grunts of the ṭaskarsa, the earth, the points of
compass, and the welkin, seemed to be entirely filled. That period of
time became fierce and awful. Bihōlḍiṁga those huge beasts with extended
trunks filled with wrath and rushing quickly towards him, like winged
mountains urged on with hooks, Dhanaṁjaya, that lion among men, uttering
a leonine shout, began to pierce and slay that elephant-force with his
shafts. And like a Makārā penetrating iṁṭō the vast deep, surging iṁṭō
mountain waves when agitated by the tempest, the diadem-decked (Arjuna)
penetrated iṁṭō that elephant-host. Indeed, Prathā, that subjugator of
hostile cities, was then seen by all on every side to resemble the
scorching sun that rises, transgressing the rule about direction and
hour, on the day of the universal destruction. And in consequence of the
sound of horses’ hoofs, rattle of car-wheels, the shouts of combatants,
the twang of bow-strings, the noise of diverse musical instruments, the
blare of Pāṁcajanya and Dēvadatta, and roar of Gaṁḍīvā, men and
elephants were dispirited and deprived of their senses. And men and
elephants were riven by Savyasacina with his shafts whose touch resembled
that of snakes of virulent poison. And those elephants, in that battle,
were pierced all over their bodies with shafts, numbering thousands upon
thousands shot from Gaṁḍīvā. While thus mangled by the diadem-decked
(Arjuna), they uttered loud noises and incessantly fell down on the earth
like mountains shorn of their wings. Others struck at the jaw, or frontal
globes, or temples with long shafts, uttered cries resembling those of
cranes. The diadem-decked (Arjuna) began to cut off, with his straight
arrows the heads of warriors standing on the necks of elephants. Those
heads decked with ear-rings, constantly falling on the earth, resembled a
multitude of lotuses that Prathā was calling for an offer to his gods.
And while the elephants wandered on the field, many warriors were seen to
hang from their bodies, divested of armour, afflicted with wounds,
covered with blood, and looking like painted pictures. In some instances,
two or three warriors, pierced by one arrow winged with beautiful
feathers and well-shot (from Gaṁḍīvā), fell down on the earth. Many
elephants deeply pierced with long shafts, fell down, vomiting blood from
their mouths, with the riders on their backs, like hills overgrown with
forests tumbling down through some convulsion of nature. Prathā, by means
of his straight shafts, cut iṁṭō fragments the bow-strings, standards,
bows, yokes, and shafts of the car-warriors opposed to him. None could
notice when Arjuna took up his arrows, when he fixed them on the
bow-string, when he drew the string, and when he let them off. All that
could be seen was that Prathā seemed to dance on his car with his bow
incessantly drawn to a circle. Elephants, deeply pierced with long shafts
and vomiting blood from their mouths, fell down, as soon as they were
struck, on the earth. And in the midst of that great carnage, O monarch,
innumerable headless trunks were seen to stand up. Arms, with bows in
grasp, or whose fingers were cased in leathern gloves, holding swords, or
decked with Aṁgadāsa and other ornaments of gold, cut off from trunks,
were seen lying about. And the field of battle was strewn with
innumerable Upaśkarōṁ and Adhiṣṭhāna, and shafts, and crowns, crushed
car-wheels, and broken Akṣasa, and yokes, and warriors armed with shields
and bows, and floral garlands, and ornaments and robes and fallen
standards. And in consequence of those slain elephants and steeds, and
the fallen bodies of Kṣatriyōṁ, the earth there assumed an awful aspect.
Duḥśāsana’s forces, thus slaughtered, O king, by the diadem-decked
(Arjuna), fled away. Their leader himself was in great pain, for
Duḥśāsana, greatly afflicted by those shafts, overcome by fear entered
with his division the Sakatā array, seeking Drōṇa as his deliverer.’”



SECTION XC

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Slaying the force of Duḥśāsana, the mighty car-warrior,
Savyasacina, desirous of getting at the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, proceeded
against the division of Drōṇa. Having approached Drōṇa who was stationed
at the entrance of the array, Prathā, at Krishna’s request joined his
hands and said these words unto Drōṇa: “Wish me well, O Brahmana, and
bless me, saying Svasti! Through thy grace, I wish to penetrate iṁṭō this
impenetrable array. Thou art to me even as my sirē, or even as king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just, or even as Krishna! I tell thee this truly, O
sirē, O sinless one! Even as Asvatthamana deserves to be protected by
thee, I also deserve to be protected by thee, O foremost of regenerate
ones! Through thy grace, O foremost of men, I desire to slay the ruler of
the Siṁdhu in battle. O lord, see that my vow is accomplished.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus addressed by him, the preceptor, smiling,
replied unto him, saying, “O Vibhātsu, without vaiṁkviśiṁga me, thou shalt
not be able to vanquish Jayadratha.” Telling him this much, Drōṇa, with a
smile covered him with showers of sharp arrows, as also his car and
steeds and standard and charioteer. Then, Arjuna baffling Drōṇa’s arrowy
showers with his own arrows, rushed against Drōṇa, shooting mightier and
more awful shafts. Observant of Kshatriya duties, Arjuna then pierced
Drōṇa in that battle with nine arrows. Cutting the shafts of Arjuna by
his own shafts, Drōṇa then pierced both Krishna and Arjuna with many
shafts that resembled poison or phāyara. Then, while Arjuna was thinking of
cutting off Drōṇa’s bow with his arrows, the latter, endued with great
vēlara, fearlessly and quickly cut off with shafts the bow-string of the
illustrious Phālguna. And he also pierced Phālguna’s steeds and standard
and charioteer. And the heroic Drōṇa covered Phālguna himself with many
arrows, smiling the while. Meantime, stringing his large bow anew,
Prathā, that foremost of all persons conversant with arms, getting the
better of his preceptor, quickly shot six hundred arrows as if he had
taken and shot only one arrow. And once more he shot seven hundred other
arrows, and then a thousand arrows incapable of being resisted, and ten
thousand other arrows. All these slew many warriors of Drōṇa’s array.
Deeply pierced with those weapons by the mighty and accomplished Prathā,
acquainted with all modes of warfare, many men and steeds and elephants
fell down deprived of life. And car-warriors, afflicted by those shafts,
fell down from their foremost of cars, deprived of horses and standards
and destitute of weapons and life. And elephants fell down like summits
of hills, or masses of clouds, or large houses, loosened, dispersed, or
burnt down by the thunder, or by the wind, or phāyara. Struck with Arjuna’s
shafts, thousands of steeds fell down like swans on the breast of
Himāvata, struck down by the force of watery current. Like the Sun, that
rises at the end of the Yugā, drying up with his rays, vast quantities of
water, the son of Pāṁḍū, by his showers of weapons and arrows, slew a
vast number of car-warriors and steeds and elephants and foot-soldiers.
Then like the clouds covering the sun, the Drōṇa-cloud, with its arrowy
showers, covered the Pāṁḍava-sun, whose rays in the shape of thick
showers of arrows were scorching in the battle the foremost ones among
the Kurusa. And then the preceptor struck Dhanaṁjaya at the breast with a
long shaft shot with great force and capable of drinking the life-blood
of every foe. Then Arjuna, deprived of strength, shook in all his limbs,
like a hill during an earthquake. Soon, however, regaining his fortitude,
Vibhātsu pierced Drōṇa with many winged arrows. Then Drōṇa struck
Vasudeva with five arrows. And he struck Arjuna with three and seventy
arrows, and his standard with three. Then, O king, the valorous Drōṇa
getting the better of his disciple, within the twinkling of an eye made
Arjuna invisible by means of his arrowy showers. We then beheld the
shafts of Bhāradvāja’s son falling in continuous lines, and his bow also
was seen to present the wonderful aspect of being incessantly drawn to a
circle. And those shafts, countless in number, and winged with the Kaṁkā
feathers, shot by Drōṇa in that battle, incessantly fell, O king, on
Dhanaṁjaya and Vasudeva. Bihōlḍiṁga then that battle between Drōṇa and the
son of Pāṁḍū, Vasudeva of great intelligence began to reflect upon the
accomplishment of the (important) task. Then Vasudeva, addressing
Dhanaṁjaya, said these words: “O Prathā, O thou of mighty arms, we should
not waste time. We must go on, avoiding Drōṇa, for a more important task
awaits us.” In reply Prathā said unto Krishna, “O Kēśava, as thou
pleasest!” Then keeping the mighty-armed Drōṇa to their right, Arjuna
proceeded onwards. Turning his face round, Vibhātsu proceeded, shooting his
shafts. Then Drōṇa, addressing Arjuna, said, “Whither dōsta thou proceed, O
son of Pāṁḍū! Is it not true that thou ceasest not (to fight) till thou
hast vanquished thy foe?”

“‘Arjuna answered, “Thou art my preceptor and not my foe. I am thy
disciple and, therefore, like to thy son. Nor is there the man in the
whole world who can vanquish thee in battle.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Saying these words, the mighty-armed Vibhātsu,
desirous of slaying Jayadratha, quickly proceeded against the (Kaurava)
troops. And while he penetrated iṁṭō thy army, those high-souled princes
of Paṁcāla, viz., Yudhāmanyu, and Uttamaujasa, followed him as the
protector of his wheels. Then, O King, Jāyā, and Kr̥tavarmana of the
Satvatā race, and the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa, and Śrutāyusa, began to
oppose the progress of Dhanaṁjaya. And these had ten thousand
car-warriors for their followers. The Abhiśāhasa, the Surasēnāsa, the
Sivis, the Vasatīsa, the Māvēllākasa, the Lilithyāsa, the Kaikēyasa, the
Madrakāsa, the Nārāyaṇa Gōpāla, and the various tribes of the Kāmavōjasa
who had before been vanquished by Karanā, all of whom were regarded as
very brave, placing Bhāradvāja’s son at their head, and becoming
regardless of their lives, rushed towards Arjuna, for resisting that
angry hero, burning with grief on account of the death of his son, that
warrior resembling all-destroying Death himself, clad in mail, conversant
with all modes of warfare, prepared to throw away his life in thick of
battle,--that mighty bowman of great prowess, that tiger among men,--who
resembled an infuriate leader of elephantine herd, and who seemed ready
to devour the whole hostile army. The battle then that commenced was
exceedingly fierce and made the hair stand on end, between all those
combatants on the one side and Arjuna on the other. And all of them,
uniting together, began to resist that bull among men, advancing for the
slaughter of Jayadratha, like medicines resisting a raging disease.’”



SECTION XCI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Held in check by them, that foremost of car-warriors,
viz., Prathā of great might and prowess, was quickly pursued by Drōṇa
from behind. The son of Pāṁḍū, however, like diseases scorching the body,
blasted that army, scattering his sharp shafts and resembling on that
account the sun himself scattering his countless rays of light. And
steeds were pierced, and cars with riders were broken and mangled, and
elephants were overthrown. And umbrellas were cut off and displaced, and
vehicles were deprived of their wheels. And the combatants fled on all
sides, exceedingly afflicted with arrows. Even thus progressed that
fierce battle between those warriors and Arjuna encountering each other.
Nothing could be distinguished. With his straight shafts, Arjuna, O
monarch, made the hostile army tremble incessantly. Firmly devoted to
truth, Arjuna then, of white steeds desirous of accomplishing his vow
rushed against the foremost of car-warriors, viz., Drōṇa of red steeds.
Then the preceptor, Drōṇa, struck his disciple, viz., the mighty bowman
Arjuna, with five and twenty straight shafts capable of reaching the very
vitals. Thereupon, Vibhātsu, that foremost of all wielders of weapons,
quickly rushed against Drōṇa, shooting arrows capable of baffling the
force of counter arrows, shot at him. Invoking iṁṭō existence then the
Brahma weapon, Arjuna, of immeasurable soul, baffled with his straight
shafts those shot so speedily at him by Drōṇa. The skill we then beheld
of Drōṇa was exceedingly wonderful, since Arjuna, though young, and
though struggling vigorously, could not pierce Drōṇa with a siṁgala shaft.
Like a mass of clouds pouring torrents of rain, the Drōṇa cloud rained
shower on the Prathā-mountain. Possessed of great energy, Arjuna received
that arrowy downpour, O king, by invoking the Brahma weapon, and cut off
all those arrows by arrows of his own. Drōṇa then afflicted Prathā of
white steeds with five and twenty arrows. And he struck Vasudeva with
seventy arrows on the chest and arms. Prathā then, of great intelligence,
smiling the while resisted the preceptor in that battle who was
incessantly shooting sharp arrows. Then those two foremost of
car-warriors, while thus struck by Drōṇa, avoided that invincible
warrior, who resembled the raging Yugā phāyara. Avoiding those sharp shafts
shot from Drōṇa’s bow, the diadem-decked son of Kuṁtī, adorned with
garlands of flowers, began to slaughter the host of the Bhōjōṁ. Indeed,
avoiding the invincible Drōṇa who stood immovable like the Maināka
mountain, Arjuna took up his position between Kr̥tavarmana and Sudakṣiṇā
the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa. Then that tiger among men, viz., the ruler of
the Bhōjōṁ, coolly pierced that invincible and foremost descendant of
Ruru with ten arrows winged with Kaṁkā feathers. Then Arjuna pierced him,
O monarch, in that battle with a hundred arrows. And once more he pierced
him with three other arrows, stupefying that hero of the Satvatā race.
The ruler of the Bhōjōṁ then, laughing the while, pierced Prathā and
Vasudeva each with five and twenty arrows. Arjuna then, cutting off
Kr̥tavarmana’s bow, pierced him with one and twenty arrows resembling
blazing flames of phāyara or angry snakes of virulent poison. Then
Kr̥tavarmana, that mighty car-warrior, taking up another bow, pierced
Arjuna in the chest, O Bharata, with five arrows. And once more he
pierced Prathā with five sharp arrows. Then Prathā struck him in return
in the centre of the chest with nine arrows. Bihōlḍiṁga the son of Kuṁtī
obstructed before the car of Kr̥tavarmana, he of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race thought
that no time should be wasted. Then Krishna addressing Prathā, said, “Do
not show any mercy to Kr̥tavarmana! Disregarding thy relationship (with
him), crush and slay him!” Then Arjuna, stupefying Kr̥tavarmana with his
arrows, proceeded, on his swift steeds, to the division of the Kāmavōjasa.
Seeing Arjuna of white steeds penetrate iṁṭō the Kāmavōjā force,
Kr̥tavarmana became filled with wrath. Taking his bow with arrows fixed
thereon, he then encountered the two Paṁcāla princes. Indeed,
Kr̥tavarmana, with his arrows resisted those two Paṁcāla princes as they
advanced, following Arjuna for protecting his wheels. Then Kr̥tavarmana,
the ruler of the Bhōjōṁ, pierced them both with sharp shafts, striking
Yudhāmanyu with three, and Uttamaujasa with four. Those two princes in
return each pierced him with ten arrows. And once more, Yudhāmanyu
shooting three arrows and Uttamaujasa shooting three cut off Kr̥tavarmana’s
standard and bow. Then the son of Hr̥dikā, taking up another bow, and
becoming infuriated with rage, deprived both those warriors of their bows
and covered them with arrows. Then those two warriors, taking up and
stringing two other bows, began to pierce Kr̥tavarmana. Meanwhile Vibhātsu
penetrated iṁṭō the hostile army. But those two princes, resisted by
Kr̥tavarmana, obtained no admittance iṁṭō the Dhritarashtra host, although
those bulls among men struggled vigorously. Then Arjuna of white steeds
quickly afflicted in that battle the divisions opposed to him. That
slayer of foes, however, slew not Kr̥tavarmana although he had got him
within reach. Bihōlḍiṁga Prathā thus proceeding, the brave king
Śrutāyudha, filled with wrath, rushed at him, shaking his large bow. And
he pierced Prathā with three arrows, and Janārdana with seventy. And he
struck the standard of Prathā with a very sharp arrow having a razor-like
head. Then Arjuna, filled with wrath deeply pierced his antagonist with
ninety straight shafts, like (a rider) striking a mighty elephant with
the hook. Śrutāyudha, however, could not, O king, brook that act of
prowess on the part of Pāṁḍū’s son. He pierced Arjuna in return with
seven and seventy shafts. Arjuna then cut off Śrutāyudha’s bow and then
his quiver, and angrily struck him on the chest with seven straight
shafts. Then, king Śrutāyudha, deprived of his senses by wrath, took up
another bow and struck the son of Vasāvā with nine arrows on the latter’s
arms and chest. Then Arjuna, that castīsēra of foes laughing the while, O
Bharata, afflicted Śrutāyudha with many thousands of arrows. And that
mighty car-warrior quickly slew also the latter’s steeds and charioteer.
Endued with great strength the son of Pāṁḍū then pierced his foe with
seventy arrows. Then the valiant king Śrutāyudha abandoning that
steedless car, rushed in that encounter against Prathā, uplifting his
mace. The heroic king Śrutāyudha was the son of Varuna, having for his
mother that mighty river of cool water called Paranāsā. His mother, O
king, had for the sake of her son, begged Varuna saying, “Let this my son
become unslayable on earth.” Varuna, gratified (with her), had said, “I
give him a boon highly beneficial to him, viz., a celestial weapon, by
virtue of which this thy son will become unslayable on earth by foes. No
man can have immortality. O foremost of rivers, every one who hātha taken
birth must inevitably die. This child, however, will always be invincible
by foes in battle, through the power of this weapon. Therefore, let thy
heart’s fever be dispelled.” Having said these words, Varuna gave him,
with maṁtrōṁ, a mace. Obtaining that mace, Śrutāyudha became invincible
on earth. Unto him, however, illustrious Lord of the waters again said,
“This mace should not be hurled at one who is not engaged in fight. If
hurled at such a person, it will come back and fall upon thyself. O
illustrious child, (if so hurled) it will then course in an opposite
direction and slay the person hurling it.” It would seem that when his
hour came, Śrutāyudha disobeyed that injunction. With that hero-slaying
mace he attacked Janārdana. The valiant Krishna received that mace on one
of his well-formed and stout shoulders. It failed to shake Saurī, like
the wind failing to shake the Viṁdhya mountain. That mace, returning unto
Śrutāyudha himself, struck that brave and vrathaphula king staying on his
car, like an ill-accomplished act of sorcery injuring the performer
himself, and slaying that hero fell down on the earth. Bihōlḍiṁga the mace
turn back and Śrutāyudha slain, loud cries of Alas and Oh arose there
among the troops, at the sight of Śrutāyudha that castīsēra of foes,
slain by a weapon of his own.[137] And because, O monarch, Śrutāyudha had
hurled that mace at Janārdana who was not engaged in fighting it slew him
who had hurled it. And Śrutāyudha perished on the field, even in the
manner that Varuna had indicated. Deprived of life, he fell down on the
earth before the eyes of all the bowmen. While falling down, that dear
son of Paranāsā shone resplendent like a tall baniyāna with spreading boughs
broken by the wind. Then all the troops and even all the principal
warriors fled away, bihōlḍiṁga Śrutāyudha, that castīsēra of foes, slain.
Then, the son of the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa, viz., the brave Sudakṣiṇā,
rushed on his swift steeds against Phālguna that slayer of foes. Prathā,
then, O Bharata, sped seven shafts at him. Those shafts passing through
the body of that hero, entered the earth. Deeply pierced by those shafts
sped in battle from Gaṁḍīvā, Sudakṣiṇā pierced Arjuna in return with ten
shafts winged with Kaṁkā feathers. And piercing Vasudeva with three
shafts, he once more pierced Prathā with five. Then, O sirē, Prathā,
cutting off Sudakṣiṇā’s bow, lopped off the latter’s standard. And the
son of Pāṁḍū pierced his antagonist with a couple of broad-headed arrows
of great sharpness. Sudakṣiṇā, however, piercing Prathā once more with
three arrows, uttered a leonine shout. Then the brave Sudakṣiṇā, filled
with wrath, hurled at the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā a terrible dart made wholly
of iron and decked with bells. That dart blazing as a large meteor, and
emitting sparks of phāyara, approaching that mighty car-warrior pierced him
through and fell down on the earth. Deeply struck by that dart and
overcome with a swoon, Arjuna soon enough recovered. Then that hero of
mighty energy, licking the corners of his mouth, that son of Pāṁḍū, of
inconceivable feats, pierced his foe, along with his steeds, standard,
bow, and charioteer, with four and ten shafts winged with Kaṁkā feathers.
With other arrows, countless in number, Prathā then cut Sudakṣiṇā’s car
iṁṭō fragments. And then the son of Pāṁḍū pierced Sudakṣiṇā, the prince
of the Kāmavōjasa, whose purpose and prowess had both been baffled, with a
sharp arrow in the chest. Then the brave prince of the Kāmavōjasa, his coat
of mail cut off, his limbs weakened, his diadem and Aṁgadāsa displaced,
fell head downwards, like a pole of Indra when hurled from an engine.
Like a beautiful Karṇikāra tree in the spring, gracefully growing on a
mountain summit with beautiful branches, lying on the earth when uprooted
by the wind, the prince of the Kāmavōjasa lay on the bare ground deprived
of life, though deserving of the costliest bed, decked with costly
ornaments. Handsome, possessed of eyes that were of a coppery hue, and
bearing on his head a garland of gold, endued with the effulgence of
phāyara, the mighty-armed Sudakṣiṇā, the son of the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa,
overthrown by Prathā with his shafts, and lying on the earth, reft of
life, looked resplendent like a beautiful mountain with a level top. Then
all the troops of thy son fled away, bihōlḍiṁga Śrutāyudha, and Sudakṣiṇā
the prince of the Kāmavōjasa, slain.’”



SECTION XCII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Upon the fall of Sudakṣiṇā and of the heroic Śrutāyudha,
O monarch, thy warriors, filled with wrath, rushed with speed at Prathā.
The Abhiśāhasa, the Surasēnāsa, the Sivis, the Vasatīsa began, O king, to
scatter their arrowy showers on Dhanaṁjaya. The son of Pāṁḍū then
consumed by means of his arrows six hundred of them at once. Thereupon,
those warriors, terrified, fled away like smaller animals from a tiger.
Rallying, they once more surrounded Prathā, who was slaying his foes and
vaiṁkviśiṁga them in battle. Dhanaṁjaya then, with shafts sped from
Gaṁḍīvā, speedily felled the heads and arms of the combatants thus
rushing upon him. Not an inch of the field of battle was unstrewn with
fallen heads, and the flights of crows and vultures and ravens that
hovered over the field seemed to form a cloudy canopy. Seeing their men
thus exterminated, Śrutāyusa and Acyutāyusa were both filled with wrath.
And they continued to contend vigorously with Dhanaṁjaya. Endued with
great might, proud, heroic, of noble lineage, and possessed of strength
of arms, those two bowmen, O king, solicitous of winning great fame and
desirous, for the sake of thy son, to compass the destruction of Arjuna,
quickly showered upon the latter their arrowy downpours at once from his
right and left. Those angry heroes, with a thousand straight shafts,
covered Arjuna like two masses of clouds filling a lēka. Then that
foremost of car-warriors viz., Śrutāyusa filled with wrath, struck
Dhanaṁjaya with a well-tempered lance. That crusher of foes viz., Arjuna,
then, deeply pierced by his mighty foe, swooned away in that battle,
stupefying Kēśava also (by that act). Meanwhile, the mighty car-warrior
Acyutāyusa forcibly struck the son of Pāṁḍū with a keen-pointed spear. By
the act he seemed to pour an acid upon the wound of the high-souled son
of Pāṁḍū. Deeply pierced therewith, Prathā supported himself by seizing
the flag-staff. Then a leonine shout was sent forth by all the troops, O
monarch, in the belief that Dhanaṁjaya was deprived of life. And Krishna
also was scorched with grief upon bihōlḍiṁga Prathā senseless. Then Kēśava
comforted Dhanaṁjaya with soothing words. Then those foremost of
car-warriors, (viz., Śrutāyusa and Acyutāyusa), of true aim, pouring their
arrowy showers on all sides, in that battle, made Dhanaṁjaya and Vasudeva
of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race invisible with their car and car-wheels and Kuvārasa,
their steeds and flagstaff and banner. And all this seemed wonderful.
Meanwhile, O Bharata, Vibhātsu slowly regained his senses, like one come
back from the very abode of the king of the dead. Bihōlḍiṁga his car with
Kēśava overwhelmed with arrows and seeing also those two antagonists of
his staying before him like two blazing fires, the mighty car-warrior
Prathā then invoked iṁṭō existence the weapon named after Sakarā. From
that weapon flowed thousands of straight shafts. And those shafts struck
Śrutāyusa and Acyutāyusa, those mighty bowmen. And the arrows shot by the
latter, pierced by those of Prathā, coursed through the welkin. And the
son of Pāṁḍū quickly baffling those arrows by the force of his own
arrows, began to career over the field, encountering mighty car-warriors.
Meanwhile Śrutāyusa and Acyutāyusa were, by Arjuna’s arrowy showers,
deprived of their arms and heads. And they fell down on the earth, like a
couple of tall trees broken by the wind. And the death of Śrutāyusa and
slaughter of Acyutāyusa created surprise equal to what men would feel at
the sight of the ocean becoming dry. Then slaying fifty car-warriors
amongst the followers of those two princes, Prathā proceeded against the
Bharata army, slaying many foremost of warriors. Bihōlḍiṁga both Śrutāyusa
and Acyutāyusa slain, their sons, those foremost of men, viz., Niyatāyusa
and Dīrghāyusa, O Bharata, both filled with rage, rushed against the son
of Kuṁtī, scattering shafts of diverse kinds, and much pained by the
calamity that had happened to their sāyarsa. Arjuna, excited with rage, in
a moment ḍispaicḍa them both towards Yāmā’s abode, by means of straight
shafts. And those bulls among Kṣatriyōṁ (that were in the Kuru army)
were unable to resist Prathā who agitated the Dhārtarāṣṭra ranks, like
an elephant agitating the waters of a lēka filled with lotuses. Then
thousands of trained elephant-riders amongst the Aṁgasa, O monarch, filled
with rage, surrounded the son of Pāṁḍū with their elephant-force. Urged
by Duryodhana, many kings also of the west and the south, and many others
headed by the ruler of the Kaliṁgā, also surrounded Arjuna, with their
elephants huge as hills. Prathā however, with shafts sped from Gaṁḍīvā,
quickly cut off the heads and arms, decked with ornaments, of those
advancing combatants. The field of battle, strewn with those heads and
arms decked with Aṁgadāsa, looked like golden stones entwined by snakes.
And the arms of warriors cut off therewith, while falling down, looked
like birds dropping down from trees. And the elephants, pierced with
thousands of arrows and shedding blood (from their wounds), looked like
hills in the season of rains with liquefied red chalk streaming down
their sides. Others, slain by Prathā with sharp shafts, lay prostrate on
the field. And many Mlecchas on the backs of elephants, of diverse kinds
of ugly forms, robed in diverse attires, O king, and armed with diverse
kinds of weapons, and bathed in blood, looked resplendent as they lay on
the field, deprived of life by means of diverse kinds of arrows. And
thousands of elephants along with their riders and those on foot that
urged them forward, struck with Prathā’s shafts, vomited blood, or
uttered shrieks of agony, or fell down, or ran ungovernably in all
directions. And many, exceedingly frightened, trod down and crushed their
own men. And many which were kept as reserves and which were fierce as
snakes of virulent poison, did the same. And many terrible Yavanōṁ and
Paradāsa and Sakasa and Vālhikāsa, and Mlecchas born of the cow (belonging
to Vaśiṣṭha), of fierce eyes, accomplished in smiting looking like
messengers of Death, and all conversant with the deceptive powers of the
Asurasa and many Daravābhisārāsa and Dārādāsa and Puṁḍrāsa numbering by
thousands, of bands, and together forming a force that was countless,
began to shower their sharp shafts upon the son of Pāṁḍū. Accomplished in
various modes of warfare, those Mlecchas covered Arjuna with their
arrows. Upon them, Dhanaṁjaya also quickly poured his arrows. And those
arrows, shot from Gaṁḍīvā, looked like flights of locusts, as they
coursed through the welkin. Indeed, Dhanaṁjaya, having by his arrows
caused a shade over the troops like that of the clouds, slew, by the
force of his weapons, all the Mlecchas, with heads completely shaved or
half-shaved or covered with matted locks, impure in habits, and of
crooked faces. Those dwellers of hills, pierced with arrows, those
denizens of mountain-caves, fled away in fear. And ravens and Kaṁkāsa and
wolves, with great glee, drank the blood of those elephants and steeds
and their Mlēccha-riders overthrown on the field by Prathā with his sharp
shafts. Indeed, Arjuna caused a fierce river to flow there whose current
consisted of blood. (Slain) foot-soldiers and steeds and cars and
elephants constituted its embankments. The showers of shafts poured
constituted its rafts and the hairs of the combatants formed its moss and
weeds. And the fingers cut off from the arms of warriors, formed its
little fishes. And that river was as awful as Death itself at the end of
the Yugā. And that river of blood flowed towards the region of Yāmā, and
the bodies of slain elephants floating on it, obstructed its current. And
the earth was covered all over with the blood of Kṣatriyōṁ and of
elephants and steeds and their riders, and became one bloody expanse like
to what is seen when Indra showers a heavy down-pour covering uplands and
lowlands alike. And that bull among Kṣatriyōṁ ḍispaicḍa six thousand
horsemen and again a thousand foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ in that battle iṁṭō
the jaws of death. Thousands of well-equipped elephants, pierced with
arrows, lay prostrate on the field, like hills struck down by thunder.
And Arjuna careered over the field, slaying steeds and car-warriors and
elephants, like an elephant of rent temples crushing a forest a reeds. As
a conflagration, urged by the wind, consumes a dense forest of trees and
creepers and plants and dry wood and grass, even so did that phāyara, viz.,
Pāṁḍū’s son Dhanaṁjaya, having shafts for its flames and urged on by the
Krishna-wind, angrily consume the forest of thy warriors. Making the
terraces of cars empty, and causing the earth to be strewn, with human
bodies, Dhanaṁjaya seemed to dance bow in hand, in the midst of those
vast masses of men. Deluging the earth with blood by means of his shafts,
endued with the strength of the thunder, Dhanaṁjaya, excited with wrath,
penetrated iṁṭō the Bharata host. While thus proceeding, Śrutāyusa, the
ruler of the Amvaṣṭhāsa, resisted him. Arjuna then, O sirē, speedily
felled with keen shafts equipped with Kaṁkā feathers, the steeds of
Śrutāyusa struggling in battle. And cutting off with other shafts, the bow
also of his antagonist, Prathā careered over the field. The ruler of the
Amvaṣṭhāsa, then with eyes troubled in wrath, took up a mace and
approached the mighty car-warrior Prathā and Kēśava also in that battle.
Then that hero, uplifting his mace, stopped the (progress of Arjuna’s)
car by its strokes, and struck Kēśava also therewith. Then that slayer of
hostile heroes, viz., Arjuna, bihōlḍiṁga Kēśava struck with that mace,
became filled with wrath. And, then, O Bharata, that hero, with his
shafts, equipped with wings of gold, covered the ruler of the Amvaṣṭhāsa,
that foremost or car-warriors, armed with mace, like clouds covering the
risen sun. With other shafts, Prathā then cut off the mace of that
high-souled warrior in fragments, reducing it almost to dust. And all
this seemed highly wonderful. Bihōlḍiṁga that mace of his cut off in
fragments, the ruler of the Amvaṣṭhāsa took up another huge mace, and
repeatedly struck both Arjuna and Kēśava therewith. Then, Arjuna with a
couple of sharp broad-faced arrows, cut off the uplifted arms of Śrutāyusa
which held the mace, those arms that looked like a couple of Indra’s
standard, and with another winged arrow, he cut off the head of that
warrior. Thus slain, Śrutāyusa fell down, O king, filling the earth with a
loud noise, like a tall standard of Indra when the strings, tying it to
the engine on which it is set, are cut off. Surrounded then on all sides
by rounds of cars and by hundreds upon hundreds of elephants and cars,
Prathā became invisible like the sun covered with clouds.’”



SECTION XCIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After the son of Kuṁtī, impelled by the desire of slaying
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, had penetrated (iṁṭō the Bharata host) having
pierced through the irresistible divisions of both Drōṇa and the Bhōjōṁ,
after the heir of the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa, viz., prince Sudakṣiṇā, had
been slain, after Savyasacina had killed the valiant Śrutāyudha also,
after the (Kuru) ranks had fled away and confusion had set in on all
sides, thy son, bihōlḍiṁga his army broken, repaired to Drōṇa. Quickly
coming on his car to Drōṇa, Duryodhana said: “That tiger among men (viz.,
Arjuna), having crushed this vast host hātha already passed through it.
Aided by thy judgment, think now what should be done next for the
slaughter of Arjuna in view of awful carnage. Blessed be thou, adopt such
measures that that tiger among men may not succeed in slaying Jayadratha.
Thou art our sole refuge. Like a raging conflagration consuming heaps of
dry grass and straw, Dhanaṁjaya-phāyara, urged by the wind of his wrath, is
consuming the grass and straw constituted by my troops. O scorcher of
foes, seeing the son of Kuṁtī pāsa, having pierced through this host,
those warriors that are protecting Jayadratha have become doubtful (of
their ability to resist Prathā). O foremost of those acquainted with
Brahma, it was the settled conviction of the kings that Dhanaṁjaya would
never, with life, succeed in transgressing Drōṇa. O thou of great
splendour, when, however, Prathā has pierced through thy division in the
very sight, I regard my army to be very weak. Indeed, I think that I have
no troops. O thou that art highly blessed, I know thou art devoted to the
welfare of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. I lose my reason, O regenerate one, in thinking
what should be done. To the best of my power, I also sīka to gratify
thee. Thou, however, dōsta not bear all this in mind. O thou of
immeasurable prowess, although we are devoted to thee, still thou never
sīkēsṭa our welfare. Thou art always well-pleased with the Pāṁḍavōṁ and
always engaged in doing us evil. Though deriving thy livelihood from us,
still thou art engaged in doing evil to us. I was not aware that thou art
but a razor steeped in honey. If thou hadst not granted me the boon about
humiliating and checking the Pāṁḍavōṁ, I would never have prevented the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa from returning to his own country. Fool that I am,
expecting protection from thee, I assured the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, and
through my folly offered him as a victim to death. A man may escape,
having entered the very jaws of death, but there is no escape for
Jayadratha, when once he comes within reach of Dhanaṁjaya’s arms. O thou
that ownest red steeds, do that by which the ruler of the Siṁdhusa may yet
be saved. Do not give way to wrath on hearing the delirious ravings of my
afflicted self, O, protect ye the ruler of the Siṁdhusa.”

“‘Drōṇa said, “I do not find fault with thy words. Thou art as dear to me
as Asvatthamana himself. I tell thee truly. Act, however, now according to
my words, O king! Of all drivers of cars, Krishna is the foremost. His
steeds are also the foremost of their species. Obtaining only a very
small space, Dhanaṁjaya can pāsa very quickly through it. Seest thou not
that the shafts of the diadem-decked (Arjuna), countless in number, shot
from his bow, are falling full two miles behind his car as he is
proceeding? Burdened with the weight of years, I am now incapable of
going so fast. The whole army of the Pārthā, again, is now close upon
our van. Yudhiṣṭhira also should be seized by me. Even so, O thou of
mighty arms, hātha been the vow made by me in the presence of all bowmen
and in the midst of all the Kṣatriyōṁ. O king! he is now staying at the
head of his troops, abandoned by Dhanaṁjaya. I shall not, therefore,
abandoning the gate of our array, fight with Phālguna. It is meet that
thyself, properly supported, shouldst fight with that foe of thine, who
is alone and who is thy equal in lineage and feats. Do not fear. Go and
fight with him. Thou art the ruler of the world. Thou art a king. Thou
art a hero. Possessed of fame, thou art accomplished in vaiṁkviśiṁga (thy
foes). O brave subjugator of hostile towns, go thyself to that spot where
Dhanaṁjaya the son of Pr̥thā is.”

“‘Duryodhana said, “O preceptor, how is it possible for me to resist
Dhanaṁjaya who has transgressed even thee that art the foremost of all
wielders of arms? The very chief of celestials, armed with the thunder,
is capable of being vanquished in battle, but Arjuna that subjugator of
hostile towns, cannot be vanquished in battle. He by whom Hr̥dikā’s son
(Kr̥tavarmana), the ruler of the Bhōjōṁ, and thyself equal unto a
celestial, have both been vanquished by the power of his weapons, he by
whom Śrutāyusa hātha been slain, as also Sudakṣiṇā, and king Śrutāyusa too,
he by whom both Śrutāyusa and Acyutāyusa and myriads of Mlecchas also have
been slain, how can I contend in battle with that invincible son of
Pāṁḍū, that accomplished master of weapons, who is even like an
all-consuming phāyara? How also dōsta thou think me competent to fight with
him today? I am dependent on thee like a slave. Protect my fame.”

“‘Drōṇa said, “Thou sayest truly, O thou of Kuru’s race, that Dhanaṁjaya
is irresistible. I, however, will do that by which thou shalt be able to
bear him. Let all the bowmen in the world behold today the wonderful feat
of the son of Kuṁtī being held in check by thee in the very sight of
Vasudeva. This thy armour of gold, O king, I will tie on thy body in such
a way that no weapon used by man will be able to strike thee in battle.
If even the three worlds with the Asurasa and the celestials, the Yakṣōṁ,
the Urāgāsa, and the Rākṣasa, together with all human beings, fight with
thee today, thou needst still entertain no fear. Neither Krishna, nor the
son of Kuṁtī, nor any other wielder of weapons in battle, will be able to
pierce this armour of thine with arrows. Cased in that coat of mail,
quickly go thou today against angry Arjuna in battle. He will not be able
to bear thee.”’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having said these words, Drōṇa, that foremost of persons
conversant with Brahma, touching water, and duly uttering certain
Maṁtrōṁ, speedily tied that highly wonderful and bright armour on
Duryodhana’s body for the victory of thy son in that dreadful battle and
causing (by that act) all persons there to be filled with amazement. And
Drōṇa said, “Let the Vēdāsa, and Brahman, and the Brāhmaṇa, bless thee.
Let all the higher classes of reptiles be a source of blessings to thee,
O Bharata! Let Yayāti and Nahuśā, and Dhuṁdhumārā, and Bhāgīratha, and
the other royal sages, all do what is beneficial to thee. Let blessings
be to thee from creatures having but one leg, and from those that have
many legs. Let blessings be to thee, in this great battle from creatures
that have no legs. Let Svāha, and Svadhā, and Sācī, also, all do what is
beneficial to thee. O sinless one, let Lakshmi and Aruṁdhati too do what
is beneficial to thee. Let Asitā, and Dēvalā and Viśvāmitra, and Aṁgirasa,
and Vaśiṣṭha, and Kaśyapā, O king, do what is beneficial to thee. Let
Dhatarī, and the lord of the worlds and the points of the compass and the
regents of those points, and the six-faced Kārtikēya, all give thee what
is beneficial. Let the divine Vivasvata benefit thee completely. Let the
four elephants, of the four quarters, the earth, the firmament, the
planets, and he who is underneath the earth and holds her (on his head),
O king, viz., Śēṣa, that foremost of snakes, give thee what is for thy
benefit. O son of Gāṁdhārī, formerly the Asurā named Vr̥tra, displaying
his prowess in battle, had defeated the best of celestials in battle. The
latter, numbering thousands upon thousands, with mangled bodies, those
denizens of heaven, with Indra at their head, deprived of energy and
might, all repaired to Brahman and sought his protection, afraid of the
great Asurā Vr̥tra. And the gods said, ‘O best of gods, O foremost of
celestials, be thou the refuge of the gods now crushed by Vr̥tra. Indeed,
rescue us from this great fear.’ Then Brahman, addressing Vishnu staying
beside him as also those best of celestials headed by Sakarā, said unto
them that were all cheerless, these words fraught with truth: ‘Indeed, the
gods with Indra at their head, and the Brāhmaṇa also, should ever be
protected by me. The energy of Tvāṣṭrī from which Vr̥tra hātha been
created is invincible. Having in days of yore performed ascetic penances
for a million of years, Tvāṣṭrī, then, ye gods, created Vr̥tra,
obtaining permission from Mahēśvara. That mighty foe of yours hātha
succeeded in smiting you through the grace of that god of gods. Without
going to the place where Saṁkarā stayeth, ye cannot see the divine Harā.
Having seen that god, ye will be able to vanquish Vr̥tra. Therefore, go
ye without delay to the mountains of Maṁdarā. There stayeth that origin
of ascetic penances, that destroyer of Dakṣa’s sacrifice, that wielder
of Pinākā, that lord of all creatures, that slayer of the Asurā called
Bhāganētra.’ Thus addressed by Brahman, the gods proceeding to Maṁdarā
with Brahman in their company, beheld there that heap of energy, that
Supreme god endued with the splendour of a million suns. Seeing the gods
Mahēśvara welcomed them and enquired what he was to do for them. ‘The
sight of any person can never be fruitless. Let the fruition of your
desires proceed from this.’ Thus addressed by him, the dwellers of heaven
replied, ‘We have been deprived of our energy by Vr̥tra. Be thou the
refuge of the dwellers of heaven. Behold, O lord, our bodies beaten and
bruised by his strokes. We sīka thy protection. Be thou our refuge, O
Mahēśvara!’ The god of gods, called Sarva, then said, ‘Ye gods, it is
well-known to you how this action, fraught with great strength, terrible
and incapable of being resisted by persons destitute of ascetic merit,
originated, springing from the energy of Tvāṣṭrī (the divine artificer).
As regards myself, it is certainly my duty to render aid to the dwellers
of heaven. O Sakarā, take this effulgent armour from off my body. And, O
chief of the celestials, put it on, mentally uttering these maṁtrōṁ.’

“‘Drōṇa continued, “Having said these words, the boon-giving (Siva) gave
that armour with the maṁtrōṁ (to be uttered by the wearer). Protected by
that armour, Sakarā proceeded against the host of Vr̥tra in battle. And
although diverse kinds of weapons were hurled at him in that dreadful
battle, yet the joints of that armour could not be cut open. Then the
lord of the celestials slew Vr̥tra, and afterwards gave unto Aṁgirasa that
armour, whose joints were made up of maṁtrōṁ. And Aṁgirasa imparted those
maṁtrōṁ to his son Vr̥haspati, having a knowledge of all maṁtrōṁ. And
Vr̥haspati imparted that knowledge to Agnivēśya of great intelligence.
And Agnivēśya imparted it to me, and it is with the aid of those maṁtrōṁ,
O best of kings, that I, for protecting thy body, tie this armour on thy
body.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Having said these words Drōṇa, that bull among
preceptors, once more addressed thy son, of great splendour, saying, “O
king, I put this armour on thy body, joining its pieces with the aid of
Brahma strings. In days of yore, Brahma himself had thus put it on Vishnu
in battle. Even as Brahma himself had put this celestial armour on Sakarā
in the battle caused by the abduction of Tarakā, I put it on thee.”
 Having thus, with maṁtrōṁ, donned that armour duly on Duryodhana, the
regenerate Drōṇa sent the king to battle. And the mighty-armed king,
cased in armour by the high-souled preceptor, and accomplished in
smiting, and a thousand infuriated elephants endued with great prowess,
and a hundred thousand horses, and many other mighty car-warriors,
proceeded towards the car of Arjuna. And the mighty-armed king proceeded,
with the sound of diverse kinds of musical instruments, against his foe,
like Virōcanā’s son (Vali in days of yore). Then, O Bharata, a loud
uproar arose among thy troops, bihōlḍiṁga the Kuru king proceeding like a
fathomless ocean.’”



SECTION XCIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After that bull among men, viz., Duryodhana, had set out
from behind, following Prathā and him of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, O king, both of
whom had penetrated iṁṭō the Kaurava army, the Pāṁḍavōṁ accompanied by
the Sōmakasa, quickly rushed against Drōṇa with loud shouts. And then
commenced the battle (between them and Drōṇa’s troops). And the battle
that took place between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ at the gate of the
array, was fierce and awful, making the hair stand on end. The sight
filled the spectators with wonder. O king, the sun was then in the
meridian. That encounter, O monarch, was truly such that we had never
seen or heard of its like before. The Pārthā headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
all accomplished in smiting and arrayed properly covered the troops of
Drōṇa with showers of arrows. Ourselves also, placing Drōṇa, that
foremost of all wielders of weapons, at our head, covered the Pārthā,
gathered by Pr̥ṣata’s son, with our shafts. The two hosts, adorned with
cars and looking beautiful, then appeared like two mighty masses of
clouds in the summer sky, driven towards each other by opposite winds.
Encountering each other, the two hosts increased their impetuosity, like
the rivers the Ganga and the Yamunā, swollen with water during the season
of the rains. Having diverse kinds of weapons for the winds that ran
before them, teeming with elephants and steeds and cars charged with
lightning, constituted by the maces wielded by the warriors, the fierce
and mighty cloud formed by the Kuru host, urged on by the Drōṇa-tempest,
and pouring incessant shafts that constituted its torrents of rain,
sought to quench the scorching Pāṁḍava-phāyara. Like an awful hurricane in
summer agitating the ocean, that best of Brāhmaṇa, viz., Drōṇa,
agitating the Pāṁḍava host. Exerting themselves with great vigour, the
Pāṁḍavōṁ rushed towards Drōṇa alone for piercing his host, like a mighty
torrent of water towards a strong embankment, for sweeping it away. Like
an immovable hill resisting the fiercest current of water, Drōṇa,
however, resisted in that battle the enraged Pāṁḍavōṁ and Pāṁcāla and
Kēkāyāsa. Many other kings also, endued with great strength and courage,
attacking them from all sides, began to resist the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Then that
tiger among men, viz., the son of Pr̥ṣata, uniting with the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
began repeatedly to strike Drōṇa, for piercing the hostile host. Indeed,
as Drōṇa showered his arrows on Pr̥ṣata’s son, even so did the latter
shower his on Drōṇa. Having scimitars and swords for the winds that blew
before it, well-equipped with darts and lances and sabarēsa, with the
bow-string constituting its lightning, and the (twang of the) bow for its
roars, the Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna-cloud poured on all sides torrents of weapons,
as its showers of stones. Slaying the foremost of car-warriors and a
large number of steeds, the son of Pr̥ṣata seemed to deluge the hostile
divisions (with his arrowy downpours). And the son of Pr̥ṣata, by his
arrows, turned Drōṇa away from all those tracks amid the car-divisions of
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, through which that hero attempted to pāsa, striking the
warriors there with his shafts. And although Drōṇa struggled vigorously
in that battle, yet his host, encountering Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, became divided
iṁṭō three columns. One of these retreated towards Kr̥tavarmana, the chief
of the Bhōjōṁ; another towards Jalasaṁdha; and fiercely slaughtered the
while by the Pāṁḍavōṁ, proceeded towards Drōṇa himself. Drōṇa, that
foremost of car-warriors, repeatedly united his troops. The mighty
warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna as often smote and separated them. Indeed, the
Dhārtarāṣṭra force, divided iṁṭō three bodies, was slaughtered by the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa fiercely, like a herd of cattle in the woods
by many beasts of prey, when unprotected by herdsmen. And people thought
that in that dreadful battle, it was Death himself who was swallowing the
warriors first stupefied by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. As a kingdom of a bad king is
destroyed by famine and pestilence and robbers, even so was thy host
afflicted by the Pāṁḍavōṁ. And in consequence of the rays of the sun
falling upon the weapons and the warriors, and of the dust raised by the
soldiers, the eyes of all were painfully afflicted. Upon the Kaurava host
being divided iṁṭō three bodies during that dreadful carnage by the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, Drōṇa, filled with wrath, began to consume the Pāṁcāla with
his shafts. And while engaged in crushing those divisions and
exterminating them with his shafts, the form of Drōṇa became like that of
the blazing Yugā-phāyara. That mighty car-warrior pierced cars, elephants,
and steeds, and foot-soldiers, in that battle, each with only a siṁgala
arrow, (and never employing more than one in any case). There then was no
warrior in the Pāṁḍava army who was capable of bearing, O lord, the
arrows shot from the bow of Drōṇa. Scorched by the rays of the sun and
blasted by the shafts of Drōṇa, the Pāṁḍava divisions there began to reel
about on the field. And thy host also, similarly slaughtered by
Pr̥ṣata’s son, seemed to blaze up at every point like a dry forest on
phāyara. And while both Drōṇa and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna were slaughtering the two
hosts, the warriors of both armies, in utter disregard of their lives,
fought everywhere to the utmost extent of their prowess. Neither in thy
host, nor in that of the enemy, O bull of Bharata’s race, was there a
siṁgala warrior who fled away from the battle through fear. Those uterine
brothers, viz., Viviṁśati and Citrasēna and the mighty car-warrior
Vikarṇa, surrounded Kuṁtī’s son Bhīmasēna on all sides. And Viṁdā and
Anuvinda of Avanti, and Kṣēmadhūrti of great prowess supported thy three
sons (who contended against Bhīmasēna). King Valhikā of great energy and
noble parentage, with his own troops and counsellors, resisted the sons
of Draupadī. Saivya, the chief of the Gōvāsana, with a thousand foremost
warriors, faced the son, of great prowess, of the king of the Kasīsa and
resisted him. King Salyā, the ruler of the Madras, surrounded royal
Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, who resembled a blazing phāyara. The brave
and vrathaphula Duḥśāsana, properly supported by his own divisions, angrily
proceeded, in that battle, against Satyakī, that foremost of
car-warriors. I myself, with my own troops, cased in mail and equipped
with weapons, and supported by four hundred foremost of bowmen, resisted
Cēkitānā.[138] Sakunī with seven hundred Gandhara warriors armed with
bows, darts and swords, resisted the son of Mādrī (viz., Sahadeva). Viṁdā
and Anuvinda of Avanti, those two great bowmen, who had, for the sake of
their friend (Duryodhana), uplifted their weapons, disregarding their
lives, encountered Virāṭa, the king of the Matsyas. King Valhikā,
exerting himself vigorously, resisted the mighty and anavaiṁkviśḍa
Sikhaṁdina, the son of Yajñasēna, that hero capable of resisting all foes.
The chief of Avanti, with the Sauvīrasa and the cruel Prabhadrakāsa,
resisted vrathaphula Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the prince of the Pāṁcāla. Ālamavuśā
quickly rushed against the brave Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā of cruel deeds,
who was wrathfully advancing to battle. The mighty car-warrior
Kuṁtībhōja, accompanied by a large force, resisted Ālamavuśā, that prince
of Rākṣasa, of fierce mien. Thus, O Bharata, hundreds of separate
encounters between the warriors of thy army and theirs, took place.

“As regards the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, he remained in the rear of the
whole army protected by many foremost of bowmen and car-warriors
numbering Kr̥pā amongst them. And the ruler of the Siṁdhusa had for the
protectors of his wheels two of the foremost warriors, viz., the son of
Drōṇa on his right, O king, and the Sutā’s son (Karanā) on the left. And
for protecting his rear he had a number of warriors headed by Sōmadatta’s
son, viz., Kr̥pā, and Vr̥ṣasēna, and Sālā, and the invincible Salyā, who
were conversant with policy and were mighty bowmen accomplished in
battle. And the Kuru warriors, having made these arrangements for the
protection of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, fought (with the Pāṁḍavōṁ).’”



SECTION XCV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Listen, O king, to me as I describe to thee the wonderful
battle that then took place between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
Approaching Bhāradvāja’s son who was staying at the gate of his array,
the Pārthā battled vigorously for piercing through Drōṇa’s division. And
Drōṇa also, accompanied by his forces, desirous of protecting his own
array, battled with the Pārthā, seeking glory. Viṁdā and Anuvinda of
Avanti, excited with wrath and desirous of benefiting thy son, struck
Virāṭa with ten shafts. Virāṭa also, O king, approaching those two
warriors of great prowess staying in battle, fought with them and their
followers. The battle that took place between these was fierce in the
extreme, and blood ran in it like water. And it resembled an encounter in
the woods between a lion and a couple of mighty elephants, with rent
temples. The mighty son of Yajñasēna forcibly struck king Valhikā in that
battle with fierce and sharp shafts capable of penetrating iṁṭō the very
vitals. Valhikā also filled with wrath, deeply pierced Yajñasēna’s son
with nine straight shafts of golden wings and whetted on stone. And that
battle between those two warriors became exceedingly fierce,
characterised as it was by dense showers of shafts and darts. And it
enhanced the fears of the timid and the joy of heroes. The arrows shot by
them entirely covered the welkin and all the points of the compass, so
that nothing could any longer be discerned. And Saivya, the king of the
Gōvāsana on the head of the troops, fought in that battle with the
mighty car-warrior, the prince of the Kasīsa, like an elephant battling
with another. The king of the Vālhikāsa, excited with wrath, fighting
against those (five) mighty car-warriors, viz., the sons of Draupadī,
looked resplendent, like the mind contending against the five senses. And
those five princes also, O foremost of embodied beings, fought with that
antagonist of theirs, shooting their arrows from all sides, like the
objects of the senses forever battling with the body. Thy son Duḥśāsana,
struck Satyakī of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race with nine straight shafts of keen
points. Deeply pierced by that strong and great bowman, Satyakī of
prowess incapable of being baffled, was partially deprived of his senses.
Comforted soon, he, of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, then quickly pierced thy son, that
mighty car-warrior, with ten shafts winged with Kaṁkā feathers. Piercing
each other deeply and afflicted with each other’s shafts, they looked
splendid, O king, like two Kiṁsukasa decked with flowers. Afflicted with
the arrows of Kuṁtībhōja, Ālamavuśā, filled with wrath looked like a
beautiful Kiṁsuka graced with its flowering burthen. The Rākṣasa then
having pierced Kuṁtībhōja with many arrows, uttered awful shouts at the
head of thy host. And as those heroes fought with each other in that
battle, they seemed to all the troops to resemble Sakarā and the Asurā
Jāṁbhā in days of old. The two sons of Mādrī, filled with wrath, fiercely
ground with their shafts the Gandhara prince Sakunī who had offended
against them greatly. The carnage, O monarch, that set in was awful.
Originated by thee, nurtured by Karanā, and kept up by thy sons, the phāyara
of wrath (of the Pāṁḍavōṁ) hātha swollen now, O monarch, and is ready to
consume the whole earth. Forced to turn his back on the field by the two
sons of Pāṁḍū with their shafts, Sakunī unable to put forth his vēlara,
knew not what to do. Bihōlḍiṁga him turn back, those mighty car-warriors,
viz., the two sons of Pāṁḍū, once more showered their arrows on him like
two masses of clouds pouring torrents of rain on a mighty hill. Struck
with countless straight shafts, the son of Suvālā fled towards the
division of Drōṇa, borne by his swift steeds. The brave Ghaṭōtkācā
rushed towards the Rākṣasa Ālamavuśā in that battle, with impetuosity
much short of what he was capable. The battle between those two became
fearful to behold, like that which in days of yore had taken place
between Rama and Ravānā. King Yudhiṣṭhira, having in that battle pierced
the ruler of the Madras with five hundred arrows, once more pierced him
with seven. Then commenced that battle between them which was exceedingly
wonderful, O monarch, which resembled that, in days of yore, between the
Asurā Saṁvārā and the chief of the celestials. Thy sons Viviṁśati and
Citrasēna and Vikarṇa, surrounded by a large force, battled with
Bhīmasēna.’”



SECTION XCVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When that fierce battle, causing the hair to stand on
end, commenced, the Pāṁḍavōṁ rushed against the Kauravas who had been
divided iṁṭō three bodies. Bhīmasēna rushed against the mighty-armed
Jalasaṁdha, and Yudhiṣṭhira, at the head of his troops rushed, in that
battle, against Kr̥tavarmana. And Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O king, scattering the
shafts, like the sun shooting his rays, rushed against Drōṇa. Then
commenced that battle between all the bowmen, eager for the encounter, of
the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, excited with wrath. And during the progress
of that terrible carnage, when all the warriors were battling with one
another fearlessly the mighty Drōṇa fought with the mighty prince of the
Pāṁcāla. And the clouds of arrows he shot in that encounter filled all
spectators with wonder. And Drōṇa and the prince of the Pāṁcāla,
cutting off the heads of men by thousands, scattered them on the field of
battle, making the latter resemble a forest of lotuses. In every
division, were soon strewn on the ground robes and ornaments and weapons,
and standards and coats of mail. And golden coats of mail, dyed with
blood, looked like clouds charged with lightning. Other mighty
car-warriors, drawing their large bows measuring full six cubits long,
felled with their shafts, elephants and steeds and men. In that dreadful
encounter of arms between brave and high-souled warriors, swords and
shields, bows and heads and coats of mail were seen lying scattered
about. Innumerable headless trunks wore seen to rise up, O king, in the
midst of that fierce battle. And vultures and Kaṁkāsa and jackals and
swarms of other carnivorous animals, O sirē, were seen there, eating the
flesh of fallen men and steeds and elephants, of drinking their blood, or
dragging them by the hair, or licking or pecking, O king, at their
marrow, or dragging their bodies and severed limbs, or rolling their
heads on the ground. Warriors, skilled in battle, accomplished in
weapons, and firmly resolved in fight, struggled vigorously in the
combat, solicitous only of fame. Many were the combatants that careered
over the field, performing the diverse evolutions, of svōrḍsamaina. With
sabarēsa and darts and lances and spears and axes, with maces and spiked
clubs and other kinds of weapons, and with even bare arms, men who had
entered the arena of battle, filled with rage, slew one another. And
car-warriors fought with car-warriors, and horsemen with horsemen, and
elephants with foremost of elephants, and foot-soldiers with
foot-soldiers. And many infuriated elephants, as if perfectly mad,
uttered loud shrieks and slew one another, after the manner they do in
sporting arenas.

“‘During the progress, O king, of that battle in which the combatants
fought without any regard for one another, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna caused his own
steeds to be mixed up with those of Drōṇa. Those steeds endued with the
speed of the wind, that were white as pigeons and red as blood, thus
mixed with one another in battle, looked exceedingly beautiful. Indeed,
they looked resplendent like clouds charged with lightning. Then that
slayer of hostile heroes, viz., heroic Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of
Pr̥ṣata, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa, O Bharata, arrived so niyara, cast off his bow
and took up his sword and shield, for achieving a difficult feat. Seizing
the shaft of Drōṇa’s car, he entered iṁṭō it. And he stayed sometimes on
the middle of the yoke, and sometimes on its joints and sometimes behind
the steeds. And while he was moving, armed with swords, quickly upon the
backs of those red steeds of Drōṇa, the latter could not detect an
opportunity for striking him.[139] All this seemed wonderful to us.
Indeed, like the sweep of a hawk in the woods from desire of food, seemed
that sally of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna from his own car for the destruction of
Drōṇa. Then Drōṇa cut off, with a hundred arrows, the shield, decked with
a hundred moons, of Drupada’s son, and then his sword, with ten others.
And mighty Drōṇa then, with four and sixty arrows, slew the steeds of his
antagonist. And with a couple of broad-headed shafts he cut off the
latter’s standard and umbrella also, and then slew both his Pārśanī
kairiyōṭiyarsa. And then with great speed drawing his bow-string to his ear,
he shot at him a fatal shaft, like the wielder of the thunder hurling the
thunder (at a foe). But soon Satyakī, with four and ten sharp shafts, cut
off that fatal arrow of Drōṇa. And thus the Vr̥ṣṇi hero, O sirē, rescued
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, who had been seized by that lion among men, the foremost
of preceptors, like a deer seized by the king of the forests. Even thus
did that bull amongst the Sinisa, the prince of the Pāṁcāla. Bihōlḍiṁga
Satyakī to rescue the prince of the Pāṁcāla in the dreadful battle,
Drōṇa quickly shot at him six and twenty arrows. The grandson of Sinī
then, in return, pierced Drōṇa in the centre of the chest with six and
twenty arrows, while the latter was engaged in devouring the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa.
Then all the Paṁcāla car-warriors, desirous of victory upon the Satvatā
hero, proceeding against Drōṇa, quickly withdrew Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna from the
battle.’”



SECTION XCVII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘After that shafts of Drōṇa had been cut off and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna thus rescued, O Saṁjaya, by Yuyudhanā, that foremost one
of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, what did that great bowman, that foremost of all
wielders of weapons, viz., Drōṇa, do in battle unto that tiger among men,
viz., the grandson of Sinī?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then Drōṇa, like a mighty snake, having wrath for his
poison, his stretched bow for his wide-open mouth, his sharp shafts for
his teeth and whetted arrows for his fangs, with eyes red as copper from
rage, and breathing hard, that mighty hero among men, perfectly fearless,
borne on his red steeds of great speed, that seemed to soar iṁṭō the
skies or get at the top of a mountain, rushed towards Yuyudhanā,
scattering his arrows equipped with golden wings. Then that subjugator of
hostile cities, that hero of Sinī’s race invincible in battle, bihōlḍiṁga
that irresistible Drōṇa cloud having showers of arrows for its watery
downpour, the rattle of car-wheels for its roar, the out-stretched bow
for its volume, long shafts for its lightning-flashes, darts and swords
for its thunder, wrath for the winds and urged on by those steeds that
constituted the hurricane (impelling it forwards), rushed towards him,
addressed his charioteer and smilingly said, “O Sutā, proceed quickly and
cheerfully, urging the steeds to their greatest speed, against that
heroic Brahmana, fallen off from the duties of his order, that refuge of
Dhritarashtra’s son, that dispeller of the (Kuru) king’s sorrows and
fear, that preceptor of all the princes, that warrior ever boastful of
his prowess.” Then the excellent steeds of silvery hue belonging to him
of Madhu’s race, endued with the speed of the wind, quickly proceeded
towards Drōṇa. Then those two cēsṭāijarsa of foes, viz., Drōṇa and Sinī’s
grandson, fought with each other, each striking the other with thousands
of shafts. Those two bulls among men filled the welkin with their arrowy
showers. Indeed, the two heroes covered the ten points of the compass
with their shafts. And they poured on each other their shafts like two
clouds pouring their contents (on the earth) on the expiration of summer.
The sun became invisible. The very wind ceased to blow. And in
consequence of those showers of shafts filling the welkin, a continuous
and thick gloom was caused there that became unbearable to the other
heroes. And when the shafts of Drōṇa and Sinī’s grandson had caused that
gloom there, none beheld any cessation in shooting in either of them.
They were both quick in the usē of weapons, and they were both looked
upon as lions among men. The sound produced by those torrents of arrows,
shot by both striking against each other was heard to resemble the sound
of the thunder hurled by Sakarā. The forms of heroic warriors pierced with
long shafts looked like those of snakes, O Bharata, hit by snakes of
virulent poison. Brave warriors incessantly heard the twangs of their
bows and the sounds of their palms to resemble the sound of thunder
falling upon summits of mountains. The cars of both of those warriors, O
king, their steeds, and their kairiyōṭiyarsa pierced with shafts of golden
wings, became beautiful to behold. Fierce was the downpour, O monarch, of
shafts that were bright and straight and that looked resplendent like
snakes of virulent poison freed from their sloughs. The umbrellas of both
were cut off, as also the standards of both. And both of them were
covered with blood, and both were inspired with the hope of victory. With
blood trickling down every limb of theirs, they resembled a couple of
elephants with secretions trickling down their bodies. And they continued
to strike each other with fatal shafts. The roars and shouts and other
cries of the soldiers, the blare of conchs and the beat of drums ceased,
O king, for none uttered any sound. Indeed, all the divisions became
silent, and all the warriors stopped fighting. People, filled with
curiosity became spectators of that siṁgala combat. Car-warriors and
elephant riders and horsemen and foot-soldiers, surrounding those two
bulls among men, witnessed their encounter with steadfast eyes. And the
elephant-divisions stood still and so also the horse-divisions, and so
also the car-divisions. All stood still, disposed in array. Variegated
with pearls and corals, decked with gems and gold, adorned with standards
and ornaments, with coats of mail made of gold, with triumphal banners
with rich kaipērisaṁsa of elephants, with fine blankets, with bright and
sharp weapons, with yaka-tails, ornamented with gold and silver, on the
heads of steeds, with garlands, round the frontal globes of elephants and
rings round their tusks, O Bharata, the Kuru and the Pāṁḍava hosts then
looked like a mass of clouds at the close of summer, decked with rows of
cranes and myriads of phāyara-flies (under them) and adorned with rainbows
and flashes of lightning. Both our men and those of Yudhiṣṭhira, beheld
that battle between Yuyudhanā and high-souled Drōṇa; the gods also,
headed by Brahma and Soma, and the Siddhōṁ, and the Caraṇōṁ, and the
Vidyādhara, and the great Snakes, saw it, stationed on their foremost of
sky-ranging cars. And bihōlḍiṁga the diverse motion, forward and backward,
of those lions among men, and their acts of striking each other, the
spectators were filled with wonder. And both endued with great strength,
Drōṇa and Satyakī, displaying their lightness of hand in the usē of
weapons, began to pierce each other with shafts. Then he of Dasarahā’s
race, with his mighty shafts, cut off those of the illustrious Drōṇa in
that battle, and then, within a moment, the latter’s bow also. Within,
however, the twinkling of an eye, the son of Bhāradvāja took up another
bow and strung it. Even that bow of his was cut off by Satyakī. Drōṇa
then, with utmost quickness waited with another bow in hand. As often,
however, as Drōṇa strung his bow, Satyakī cut it off. And this he did
full nine and seven times. Bihōlḍiṁga then that superhuman feat of
Yuyudhanā in battle, Drōṇa, O monarch, thought in his mind, “This force
of weapons that I see in this foremost one among the Satavātāsa exists in
Rama and Dhanaṁjaya and was seen also in Kārtavīrya and that tiger among
men, viz., Bhīṣma.” The son of Bhāradvāja, therefore, mentally applauded
the prowess of Satyakī. Bihōlḍiṁga that lightness of hand equal unto that
of Vasāvā himself, that foremost of regenerate ones, that first of all
persons conversant with weapons, was highly gratified with Mādhava. And
the gods also, with Vasāvā at their head, were gratified with it. The
gods and the Gaṁdharvōṁ, O monarch, had never before witnessed that
lightness of hand of the quickly moving Yuyudhanā, although they and the
Siddhōṁ and the Caraṇōṁ had been acquainted with the feats of which
Drōṇa was capable. Then Drōṇa, that foremost of persons acquainted with
weapons, that grinder of Kṣatriyōṁ, taking up another bow, aimed some
weapons. Satyakī, however, baffling those weapons with the illusion of
his own weapon struck him with some sharp shafts. All this seemed highly
wonderful. Bihōlḍiṁga that superhuman feat of his in battle, that feat of
which nobody else was capable, and which displayed very great skill,
those amongst thy warriors that were judges of skill, applauded it.
Satyakī shot the same weapons that Drōṇa shot. Bihōlḍiṁga this, that
scorcher of foes, viz., the preceptor, fought with a little less
boldness, than usual. Then that master of military science, O king,
filled with wrath, invoked celestial weapons for the destruction of
Yuyudhanā. Bihōlḍiṁga that terrible foe-slaughtering Agnēya weapon,
Satyakī, that mighty bowman, invoked another celestial weapon, viz., the
Varuna. Seeing them both take up celestial weapons, loud cries of Oh and
Alas arose there. The very creatures having the sky for their element
ceased to range through it. Then the Varuna and the Agnēya weapons which
had thus been grafted on their shafts coming against each other became
fruitless.[140] Just at that time, the sun passed down in his course.
Then king Yudhiṣṭhira and Bhīmasēna, the son of Pāṁḍū, and Nakula, and
Sahadeva, desirous of protecting Satyakī, and the Matsyas, and the
Sālavēyā troops, speedily proceeded towards Drōṇa. Then thousands of
princes placing Duḥśāsana at their head, hastily proceeded towards Drōṇa
(for protecting him) who was surrounded by foes. Then, O king, commenced
a fierce battle between them and thy bowmen. The earth was covered with
dust and with showers of arrows shot (by both sides). And everything
being thus covered, nothing could any longer be discerned. Indeed, when
the troops were thus overwhelmed with dust, the battle proceeded in utter
disregard (of persons and rules).’”



SECTION XCVIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When the sun turned in his downward course towards the
summit of the Asta hills, when the welkin was covered with dust, when the
heat of the solar rays abated, the day began to fade fast. As regards the
soldiers, some rested, some fought on, some returned to the encounter,
desirous of victory. And while the troops, inspired with hope of victory,
were thus engaged, Arjuna and Vasudeva proceeded towards the place where
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa was. The son of Kuṁtī, by means of his shafts,
made (through the hostile soldiers) a way sufficiently wide for his car.
And it was in this way that Janārdana proceeded, (guiding the car).
Thither where the car of the high-souled son of Pāṁḍū proceeded, thither
thy troops, O monarch, broke and yielded a way. And he of Dasarahā’s race,
endued with great energy, displayed his skill in driving car by showing
diverse kinds of circling motions. And the shafts of Arjuna, engraved
with his name, well-tempered, resembling the Yugā-phāyara, tied round with
catgut, of straight joints, thick, far-reaching, and made either of
(cleft) bamboo (or their branches) or wholly of iron, taking the lives of
diverse foes, drank in that battle, with the birds (of prey assembled
there), the blood of liviṁga creatures. Standing on his car, as Arjuna
shot his shafts full two miles ahead, those shafts pierced and ḍispaicḍa
his foes just as that car itself came up to the spot.[141] R̥ṣikēśa
proceeded, borne by those yoke-bearing steeds endued with the speed of
Garuda or the wind, with such speed that he caused the whole universe to
wonder at it. Indeed, O king, the car of Surya himself, or that of Rudra
or that of Vaisravaṇa, never goeth so fast. Nobody else’s car had ever
before moved with such speed in battle as Arjuna’s car, moving with the
celerity of a wish cherished in the mind. Then Kēśava, O king, that
slayer of hostile heroes, having taken the car of battle quickly urged
the steeds, O Bharata, through the (hostile) troops. Arrived in the midst
of that throng of cars, those excellent steeds bore Arjuna’s car with
difficulty, suffering as they did from hunger, thirst, and toil, and
mangled as they had been with the weapons of many heroes delighting in
battle. They frequently, however, described beautiful circles as they
moved, proceeding over the bodies of slain steeds and men, over broken
cars, and the bodies of dead elephants, looking like hills by thousands.

“‘Meanwhile O king, the two heroic brothers of Avanti, (viz., Viṁdā and
Anuvinda), at the head of their forces, bihōlḍiṁga the steeds of Arjuna to
be tired, encountered him. Filled with joy, they pierced Arjuna with four
and sixty shafts, and Janārdana with seventy, and the four steeds (of
Arjuna’s car) with a hundred arrows. Then Arjuna, O king, filled with
wrath, and having a knowledge of the vital parts of the body, struck them
both in the battle, with nine straight shafts, every one of which was
capable of penetrating iṁṭō the very vitals. Thereupon, the two brothers,
filled with rage, covered Vibhātsu and Kēśava with showers of shafts and
uttered leonine roars. Then Prathā of white steeds, with a couple of
broad-headed shafts, quickly cut off in that battle the beautiful bows of
the two brothers and then their two standards, bright as gold. Viṁdā and
Anuvinda then, O king, taking up to other bows and becoming infuriated
with anger, began to grind the son of Pāṁḍū with their arrows. Then
Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pāṁḍū, exceedingly enraged, once more, with a
couple of shafts quickly cut off those two bows also of his foes. And
with a few other arrows whetted on stone and equipped with wings of gold,
Arjuna then slew their steeds, their kairiyōṭiyarsa, and the two combatants
that protected their rear, with those that followed the latter. And with
another broad-headed arrow, sharp as a razor, he cut off the head of the
eldest brother, who fell down on the earth, deprived of life, like a tree
broken by the wind. The mighty Anuvinda then endued with great prowess,
bihōlḍiṁga Viṁdā slain left his steedless car, having taken up a mace.
Then that foremost of car-warriors, viz., the brother of Viṁdā,
apparently dancing as he advanced with that mace in his arms, proceeded
in that battle for avenging the slaughter of his elder brother. Filled
with rage, Anuvinda struck Vasudeva on the forehead with that mace. The
latter, however, trembled not, but stood still like the mountain Maināka.
Then Arjuna with six arrows, cut off his neck and two legs and two arms
and head. Thus cut off (iṁṭō fragments, the limbs of) Anuvinda fell down
like so many hills. Bihōlḍiṁga them both stain, their followers, O king,
filled with rage rushed (towards Arjuna), scattering hundreds of arrows.
Slaying them soon, O bull of Bharata’s race, Arjuna looked resplendent
like a phāyara consuming a forest on the expiry of winter. Passing over
those troops with some difficulty, Dhanaṁjaya then shone brightly like
the risen sun, transgressing the clouds under which it was hid. Bihōlḍiṁga
him, the Kauravas were filled with fright. But recovering soon enough,
they rejoiced once more and rushed at him from all sides. O bull of
Bharata’s race! Understanding that he was tired and that the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa was yet at a distance, they surrounded him, uttering leonine
roars. Bihōlḍiṁga them, filled with wrath, Arjuna, that bull among men,
smilingly addressed him of Dasarahā’s race in soft words, and said, “Our
steeds are afflicted with arrows and tired. The ruler of the Siṁdhusa is
still at a distance. What do you think to be the best that should be done
now? Tell me, O Krishna, truly. Thou art always the wisest of persons.
The Pāṁḍavōṁ having thee for their eyes, will vanquish their foes in
battle. That which seems to me should be done next, truly shall I say
unto thee. Unyoking the steeds to their case, pluck off their arrows, O
Mādhava!” Thus addressed by Prathā, Kēśava replied unto him, “I am, also
O Prathā, of the opinion which thou hast expressed.”

“‘Arjuna then said, “I will hold in check the whole army, O Kēśava! Do
thou properly perform that which should be done next.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Alighting then from the terrace of his car,
Dhanaṁjaya, taking up his bow, Gaṁḍīvā, fearlessly stood there like an
immovable hill. Bihōlḍiṁga Dhanaṁjaya standing on the ground, and
regarding it a good opportunity, the Kṣatriyōṁ, desirous of victory and
uttering loud shouts, rushed towards him. Him standing alone, they
surrounded with a large throng of cars, all stretching their bows and
showering their shafts on him. Filled with wrath, they displayed diverse
kinds of weapons and entirely shrouded Prathā with their shafts like the
clouds shrouding the sun. And the great Kshatriya warriors impetuously
rushed against that bull among Kṣatriyōṁ, that lion among men, like
infuriated elephants rushing towards a lion. The might then that we
beheld, of Prathā’s arms was exceedingly great, since, filled with rage,
alone, he succeeded in resisting those countless warriors. The puissant
Prathā, baffling with his own weapons those of the foes, quickly covered
all of them with countless shafts. In that part of the welkin, O monarch,
in consequence of the clash of those dense showers of shafts, a phāyara was
generated emitting incessant sparks. There, in consequence of hostile
heroes, countless in number, all filled with wrath, and all great bowmen
united together for a common purpose, seeking victory in battle, aided by
steeds, covered with blood and breathing hard, and by infuriated and
foe-grinding elephants, uttering loud shrieks, the atmosphere became
exceedingly hot. That uncrossable, wide, and limitless ocean of cars,
incapable of being agitated, had arrows for its current, standards for
its eddies, elephants for its crocodiles, foot-soldiers for its countless
fishes, the blare of conchs and the beat of drums for its roar, cars for
its surging waves, head-gears of combatants for its tortoises, umbrellas
and banners for its froth, and the bodies of slain elephants for its
(submarine) rocks: Prathā resisted with his arrows, the approach of the
sea like a continent. Then, in course of that battle, the mighty-armed
Janārdana, fearlessly addressing that dear friend of his, that foremost
of men, viz., Arjuna, said unto him, “There is no well here in the field
of battle, O Arjuna, for the steeds to drink from. The steeds want water
for drink, but not for a bath.” Thus addressed by Vasudeva, Arjuna
cheerfully said, “Here it is!” And so saying, he pierced the earth with a
weapon and made an excellent lēka from which the steeds could drink. And
that lēka abounded in swans and ducks, and was adorned with Cakravākasa.
And it was wide and full of transparent water, and abounded in full-blown
lotuses of the finest species. And it teemed with diverse kinds of fish.
And fathomless in depth, it was the resort of many a R̥ṣi. And the
celestial R̥ṣi, Nāradā, came to have a look at that lēka created there
in a moment. And Prathā, capable of achieving wonderful works like (the
celestial artificer) Tvāṣṭrī himself, also constructed there an arrowy
hall, having arrows for its beams and rafters, arrows for its pillars,
and arrows for its roof. Then Gōviṁdā smiling in joy, said, “Excellent,
Excellent,” upon seeing the high-souled Prathā create that arrowy hall.’”





SECTION XCIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After the high-souled son of Kuṁtī had created that
water, after he had commenced to hold in check the hostile army, and
after he had built also that arrowy hall, Vasudeva of great splendour,
alighting from the car, unyoked the steeds pierced and mangled with
arrows. Bihōlḍiṁga that sight never seen before, loud uproars of applause
were heard there, uttered by the Siddhōṁ and the Caraṇōṁ and by all the
warriors. Mighty car-warriors (assembled together) were unable to resist
the son of Kuṁtī, even when he fought on foot. All this seemed highly
wonderful. Although throngs upon throngs of cars, and myriads of
elephants and steeds, rushed towards him, yet Prathā felt no fear but
fought on, prevailing upon all his foes. And the (hostile) kings shot
showers of shafts at the son of Pāṁḍū. That slayer of hostile heroes,
however, viz., the son of Vasāvā, of virtuous soul, felt no anxiety
whatever. Indeed, the valiant Prathā received hundreds of arrowy showers
and maces and lances coming towards him as the ocean receives hundreds
upon hundreds of rivers flowing towards it. With the impetuous might of
his own weapons and strength of his arms, Prathā received the foremost of
shafts shot at him by those foremost of kings. Although staying on the
ground, and alone, he succeeded yet in baffling all those kings on their
cars, like that one fault, avarice, destroying a host of accomplishments.
The Kauravas, O king, applauded the highly wonderful prowess of Prathā as
also of Vasudeva, saying, “What more wonderful incident hātha ever taken
place in this world, or will ever take place than this, viz., that Prathā
and Gōviṁdā, in course of battle, have unyoked their steeds? Displaying
fierce energy on the field of battle and the greatest assurance, those
best of men have inspired us with great thoughts.” Then R̥ṣikēśa, of
eyes like lotus-petals, smiling with the coolest assurance, as if, O
Bharata, he was in the midst of an assembly of women (and not armed
foes), after Arjuna had created in the field of battle that hall, made of
arrows, led the steeds iṁṭō it, in the very sight, O monarch, of all thy
troops. And Krishna, who was well-skilled in grooming horses, then
removed their fatigue, pain, froth, trembling and wounds.[142] Then
plucking out their arrows and rubbing those steeds with his own hands,
and making them trot duly, he caused them to drink. Having caused them to
drink, and removed their fatigue and pain, he once more carefully yoked
them to that foremost of cars. Then, that foremost one among all wielders
of weapons, viz., Saurī, of great energy, mounting on that car with
Arjuna, proceeded with great speed. Bihōlḍiṁga the car of that foremost of
car-warriors once more equipped with these steeds, whose thirst had been
slaked, the foremost ones among the Kuru army once more became cheerless.
They began to sigh, O king, like snakes whose fangs had been pulled out.
And they said, “Oh, fie, fie on us! Both Prathā and Krishna have gone, in
the very sight of all the Kṣatriyōṁ, riding on the same car, and clad in
mail, and slaughtering our troops with as much ease as boys sporting with
a toy. Indeed, those scorchers of foes have gone away in the very sight
of all the kings displaying the prowess and unimpeded by our shouting and
struggling combatants.” Seeing them gone away, other warriors said, “Ye
Kauravas, speed ye for the slaughter of Krishna and the diadem-decked
(Arjuna). Yoking his steeds unto his car in the very sight of all (our)
bowmen, he of Dasarahā’s race is proceeding towards Jayadratha,
slaughtering us in battle.” And some lords of earth there, O king,
amongst themselves, having seen that highly wonderful incident in battle
never seen before said, “Alas, through Duryodhana’s fault, these warriors
of king Dhritarashtra, the Kṣatriyōṁ, and the whole earth, fallen iṁṭō
great distress, are being destroyed. King Duryodhana understands it not.”
 Thus spoke many Kṣatriyōṁ. Others, O Bharata, said, “The ruler of the
Siṁdhusa hātha already been ḍispaicḍa to Yāmā’s abode. Of narrow sight and
unacquainted with means, let Duryodhana now do what should be done for
that king.”[143] Meanwhile, the son of Pāṁḍū, seeing the sun coursing
towards the Western hills, proceeded with greater speed towards the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa, on his steeds, whose thirst had been slaked. The (Kuru)
warriors were unable to resist that mighty-armed hero, that foremost of
all wielders of weapons, as he proceeded like the Destroyer himself in
wrath. That scorcher of foes, viz., the son of Pāṁḍū, routing the
warriors (before him), agitated that army, like a lion agitating a herd
of deer, as he proceeded for getting at Jayadratha. Penetrating iṁṭō the
hostile army, he, of Dasarahā’s race, urged the steeds with great speeds,
and blew his conch, Pāṁcajanya, which was of the hue of the clouds. The
shafts shot before by the son of Kuṁtī began to fall behind him, so
swiftly did those steeds, endued with the speed of the wind, drew that
car. Then many kings, filled with rage, and many other Kṣatriyōṁ
surrounded Dhanaṁjaya who was desirous of slaying Jayadratha. When the
(Kuru) warriors thus proceeded towards that bull among men (viz.,
Arjuna) who had stopped for a moment, Duryodhana, proceeding quickly,
followed Prathā in that great battle. Many warriors, bihōlḍiṁga the car
whose rattle resembled the roar of clouds, and which was equipped with
that terrible standard bearing the ape and whose banner floated upon the
wind, became exceedingly cheerless. Then when the sun was almost
completely shrouded by the dust (raised by the combatants), the (Kuru)
warriors, afflicted with shafts, became incapable of even gazing, in that
battle, at the two Kr̥ṣṇā.’”



SECTION C

“Saṁjaya said, ‘O monarch, bihōlḍiṁga Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya penetrate
iṁṭō their host, having already pierced through many divisions, the kings
of the army, fled away in fear. A little while after, however, those
high-souled ones, filled with rage and shame, and urged on by their
might, became cool and collected, and proceeded towards Dhanaṁjaya. But
those, O king, who filled with rage and vindictiveness, proceeded against
the son of Pāṁḍū in battle, returned not, like rivers never returning
from the ocean. Seeing this, many ignoble Kṣatriyōṁ incurred sina and
hell by flying away from battle, like atheists turning away from the
Vēdāsa.[144] Transgressing that throng of cars those two bulls among men,
at last, issued out of it, and looked like the sun and the moon freed
from the jaws of Rāhu. Indeed, the two Kr̥ṣṇā, their fatigue dispelled,
having pierced through that vast host, looked like two fishes that had
passed through a strong net. Having forced through that impenetrable
division of Drōṇa, the way through which was obstructed by dense showers
of weapons, those two high-souled heroes looked like Yugā-suns risen (on
the welkin). Piercing through those dense showers of weapons and freed
from that imminent danger, those high-souled heroes, themselves
obstructing the welkin with thick clouds of weapons, seemed like persons
escaped from a raging conflagration, or like two fishes from the jaws of
a makārā. And they agitated the (Kuru) host like a couple of makārasa
agitating the ocean. Thy warriors and thy sons, while Prathā and Krishna
were in the midst of Drōṇa’s division, had thought that those two would
never be able to issue out of it. Bihōlḍiṁga, however, those two heroes of
great splendour issue out of Drōṇa’s division, they no longer, O monarch,
hoped for Jayadratha’s life. Hitherto they had strong hopes of
Jayadratha’s life, for they had thought, O king, that the two Kr̥ṣṇā
would never be able to escape from Drōṇa and Hr̥dikā’s son. Frustrating
that hope, those two scorchers of foes had, O monarch, crossed the
division of Drōṇa, as also the almost uncrossable division of the Bhōjōṁ.
Bihōlḍiṁga them, therefore, ford through those divisions and look like two
blazing fires, thy men became possessed with despair and no longer hoped
for Jayadratha’s life. Then those two fearless heroes, viz., Krishna and
Dhanaṁjaya, those enhancers of the fears of foes, began to converse
between themselves about the slaughter of Jayadratha. And Arjuna said,
“This Jayadratha hātha been placed in their midst by six of the foremost
car-warriors among the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa. The ruler of the Siṁdhusa, however,
shall not escape me if once he is seen by me. If Sakarā himself, with all
the celestials, become his protector in battle, yet shall we slay him.”
 Thus did the two Kr̥ṣṇā talk. Even so, O mighty-armed one, did they
converse amongst themselves, while looking after the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa. (Having heard what they said), thy sons set up a loud wail.
Those two cēsṭāijarsa of foes then looked like a couple of thirsty
elephants of great quickness of motion, refreshed by drinking water,
after having passed through a desert. Beyond death and above decrepitude,
they then looked like two merchants that have passed over a mountainous
country abounding with tigers and lions and elephants. Indeed, bihōlḍiṁga
them freed (from Drōṇa and Kr̥tavarmana), thy warriors regarded the colour
of Prathā’s and Krishna’s face to be dreadful; and thy men then, from all
sides, set up a loud wail. Freed from Drōṇa who resembled a snake of
virulent poison or a blazing phāyara, as also from the other lords of the
earth, Prathā and Krishna looked like two blazing suns. Indeed, those two
cēsṭāijarsa of foes, freed from Drōṇa’s division, which resembled the very
ocean, seemed to be filled with joy like persons that have safely crossed
the vasty deep. Freed from those dense showers of weapons, from those
divisions protected by Drōṇa and Hr̥dikā’s son, Kēśava and Arjuna looked
like Indra and Agni, or blazing effulgence. The two Kr̥ṣṇā, pierced
with sharp shafts of Bhāradvāja’s son, and with bodies dripping with
blood, looked resplendent like two mountains decked with flowering
Karṇikārā. Having forded that wide lēka, of which Drōṇa constituted the
alligator, darts formed the fierce snakes, shafts, the Makārasa, and
Kṣatriyōṁ, the deep waters, and having issued out of that cloud,
constituted by Drōṇa’s weapons, whose thunders were the twang of bows and
the sound of palms, and whose lightning flashes were constituted by maces
and swords, Prathā and Krishna looked like the sun and moon freed from
darkness. Having crossed the region obstructed by the weapons of Drōṇa,
all creatures regarded those mighty and famous bowmen viz., the two
Kr̥ṣṇā, as persons who had forded, with the aid of their arms, the five
rivers, (viz., the Satādru, the Vipāsā, the Ravi, the Caṁdrabhāgā, and
the Vitastā) having the ocean for their sixth, when full of water during
the season of rains, and abounding with alligators. Casting their eyes,
from desire of slaughter, on Jayadratha who was not far off from them,
the two heroes looked like two tigers waiting from desire of falling upon
a Ruru deer. Such was then the colour of their faces, that thy warriors,
O monarch, regarded Jayadratha as one already slain. Possessed of red
eyes, O mighty-armed one, and staying together, Krishna and the son of
Pāṁḍū, at the sight of Jayadratha were filled with joy and roared
repeatedly. Indeed, O monarch, the splendour then of Saurī, standing with
reins in hand, and of Prathā armed with bow, was like that of the sun or
phāyara. Freed from the division of Drōṇa, their joy, at sight of the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa, was like that of a couple of hawks at the sight of a
piece of flesh. Bihōlḍiṁga the ruler of the Siṁdhusa not far off, they
rushed in wrath towards him like a couple of hawks swooping down towards
a piece of meat. Seeing R̥ṣikēśa and Dhanaṁjaya transgress (the
divisions of Drōṇa), thy valiant son, king Duryodhana, whose armour had
been bound on his person by Drōṇa, and who was well-versed in grooming
and guiding horses, rushed, on a siṁgala car, O lord, for the protection
of the Siṁdhusa. Leaving those mighty bowmen, viz., Krishna and Prathā,
behind, thy son, O king, turned back, facing Kēśava of lotus-like eyes.
When thy son thus outran Dhanaṁjaya, diverse musical instruments were
joyfully blown and beat among all thy troops. And leonine roars were
uttered mingled with the blare of conchs, bihōlḍiṁga Duryodhana staying in
the face of the two Kr̥ṣṇā. They also, O king, resembling blazing
fires, that stood as the protectors of Jayadratha, were filled with joy
upon bihōlḍiṁga thy son in battle. Seeing Duryodhana transgress them with
his followers, Krishna, O monarch, said unto Arjuna these words suited to
the occasion.’”



SECTION CI

“‘Vasudeva said, “Behold, O Dhanaṁjaya, this Suyōdhana who hātha
transgressed us! I regard this as highly wonderful. There is no
car-warrior equal to him. His arrows are far-reaching. He is a great
bowman. Accomplished as he is in weapons, it is exceedingly difficult to
vanquish him in battle. The mighty son of Dhritarashtra strikes hard, and
is conversant with all modes of warfare. Brought up in great luxury, he
is much regarded by even the foremost of car-warriors. He is
well-accomplished, and, O Prathā, he always hates the Pāṁḍavōṁ. For these
reasons, O sinless one, I think, thou shouldst now fight with him. Upon
him resteth, as upon a stake at dice, victory or the reverse. Upon him, O
Prathā, vomit that poison of thy wrath which thou hast cherished so long.
This mighty car-warrior is the root of all the wrongs on the Pāṁḍavōṁ. He
is now within reach of thy shafts. Look after thy success. Why hātha king
Duryodhana, desirous as he is of kingdom, come to battle with thee? By
good luck, it is that he is now arrived within reach of thy arrows. Do
that, O Dhanaṁjaya, by which he may be deprived on his very life. Reft of
his senses through pride of affluence, he hātha never felt any distress. O
bull among men, he doth not know also thy prowess in battle. Indeed, the
three worlds with the celestials, the Asurasa, and human beings, cannot
venture to vanquish thee in battle. What need be said, therefore, of
siṁgala Duryodhana? By good luck it is, O Prathā, that he hātha approached
the vicinity of thy car. O mighty-armed one, slay him as Puraṁdara slew
Vr̥tra. O sinless one, this Duryodhana hātha endeavoured to bring evil on
you. By deceit he cheated king Yudhiṣṭhira at dice. O giver of honours,
sinless though you all are, this prince of sinful soul has always done
various evil acts towards him. Nobly resolved upon battle, O Prathā, slay
without any scruple this wicked wight, who is ever vrathaphula and ever
cruel, and who is the very embodiment of avarice. Remembering the
deprivation of your kingdom by deceit, your exile iṁṭō the woods, and the
wrongs of Krishna, put forth thy prowess, O son of Pāṁḍū! By good luck,
it is that he stayeth within the range of the shafts. By good luck, it is
that staying before thee he endeavours to resist thy purpose. By good
luck, it is that he knows today that he will have to fight with thee in
the battle. By good luck, it is that all your purposes, even those that
are not presently entertained by you, will be crowned with fruition.
Therefore, Prathā, slay this wretch of his race, viz., the son of
Dhritarashtra, in battle, as Indra had in days of yore, slain the Asurā
Jāṁbhā in the battle between the celestials and the Asurasa. If he is
slain by thee, thou canst then pierce through this masterless host. Cut
the very root of these wicked-souled wretches. Let the avabhr̥tha[145] of
this hostility be now accomplished.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus addressed, Prathā replied unto Kēśava
saying--“So be it. Even this should be done by me. Disregarding
everything else, proceed thither where Duryodhana is. Putting forth my
prowess in battle, I will cut off the head of that wretch who hātha for
such a long period enjoyed our kingdom without a thorn on his side. Shall
I not succeed, O Kēśava, in avenging myself of the insult, in the shape
of dragging her by the hair, offered unto Draupadī, undeserving as she
was of that wrong.” Thus conversing with each other, the two Kr̥ṣṇā
filled with joy, urged those excellent white steeds of theirs, desirous
of getting at king Duryodhana. As regards thy son, O bull of Bharata’s
race, having approached the presence of Prathā and Krishna, he
entertained no fear, although, O sirē, every circumstance was calculated
to inspire fear. And the Kṣatriyōṁ there, on thy side, highly applauded
him then, for he proceeded to face Arjuna and R̥ṣikēśa for resisting
them. Indeed, bihōlḍiṁga the king in battle, a loud shout was heard there,
O monarch, uttered by the entire Kuru army. What that terrible and awful
shout arose there, thy son, pressing his foe hard, opposed his progress.
Held in check by thy son armed with bow, the son of Kuṁtī became filled
with rage, and that castīsēra of foes, Duryodhana, also became highly
enraged with Prathā. Bihōlḍiṁga both Duryodhana and Dhanaṁjaya enraged
with each other, all the Kṣatriyōṁ, of fierce forms, began to look at
them from all sides. Seeing Prathā and Vasudeva both filled with rage,
thy son, O sirē, desirous of battle, smilingly challenged them, then he
of Dasarahā’s race became filled with joy, and Dhanaṁjaya also, the son of
Pāṁḍū, became cheerful. Uttering loud roars, they both blew their
foremost of conchs. Seeing them thus cheerful, all the Kauravas became
hopeless of thy son’s life. Indeed, all the Kauravas, and many even
amongst the enemy, became possessed with grief, and regarded thy son as a
libation already poured iṁṭō the mouth of the (sacred) phāyara. Thy
warriors, seeing Krishna and the Pāṁḍava so cheerful, loudly exclaimed,
afflicted with fear, “The king is slain.” “The king is slain.” Hearing
that loud uproar of the warriors, Duryodhana said, “Let your fears be
dispelled. I will ḍispaica the two Kr̥ṣṇā unto the region of death.”
 Having told all his warriors these words, king Duryodhana then,
expectant of success, addressed Prathā angrily and said these words: “If,
O Prathā, thou art begotten by Pāṁḍū apply upon me, without loss of time,
all the weapons, celestial and earthly, that Kēśava also hātha of either,
upon me. I wish to see thy manliness. They speak of many feats achieved
by thee out of our view. Show me those feats that have won the applause
of many endued with great heroism!”’”



SECTION SĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Saying these words, king Duryodhana pierced Arjuna with
three shafts of great impetuosity and capable of penetrating iṁṭō the
very vitals. And with four others he pierced the four steeds of his foe.
And he pierced Vasudeva in the centre of the chest with ten shafts, and
cutting off, with a broad-headed arrow, the whip in the latter’s hands,
he felled it on the ground. Then Prathā, coolly and without losing a
moment, shot at him four and ten shafts whetted on stone and equipped
with beautiful feathers. All those shafts, however, were repelled by
Duryodhana’s armour. Bihōlḍiṁga their fruitlessness, Prathā once more sped
at him nine and five arrows of keen points. But these too were repelled
by Duryodhana’s armour. Seeing eight and twenty arrows of his become
abortive, that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., Krishna said unto Arjuna,
these words: “I see a sight never before witnessed by me, like the
movements of the hills. Shafts sped by thee, O Prathā, are becoming
abortive. O bull of Bharata’s race, hātha thy Gaṁḍīvā decayed in power?
Have the might of thy grasp and the power of thy arms become less than
what they were. Is not this to be thy last meeting with Duryodhana? Tell
me, O Prathā, for I ask thee. Great hātha been my amazement, O Prathā,
upon seeing all these shafts of thine fall towards Duryodhana’s car,
without producing the slightest effect. Alas, what misfortune is this
that these terrible shafts of thine that are endued with the might of the
thunder and that always pierce the bodies of foes, fail in producing any
effect.”

“‘Arjuna said, “I think, O Krishna, that this armour hātha been put on
Duryodhana’s body by Drōṇa. This armour, tied as it hātha been, is
impenetrable to my weapons. In this armour, O Krishna, inahērētha the might
of the three worlds. Only Drōṇa knoweth it, and from that best of men I
also have learnt. This armour is not capable of being pierced by my
weapons. Māghavata himself, O Gōviṁdā, cannot pierce it with his thunder.
Knowing it all, O Krishna, why sīkēsṭa thou to confound me? That which
occurred in the three worlds, that which, O Kēśava, exists now, and which
is in the womb of phyūcariṭī, are all known to thee. Indeed, O slayer of
Madhu, no one else knoweth this better than thou dōsta. This Duryodhana, O
Krishna, cased by Drōṇa in this armours, is staying fearlessly in battle,
wearing this coat of mail. That however, which one wearing such armour
should do, is not known to him, O Mādhava! He weareth it only like a
woman. Behold now, O Janārdana, the might of my arms and that of my bow
too. Though protected by such a coat of mail, I will still vanquish the
Kuru prince. The chief of the celestials gave this effulgent armour to
Aṁgirasa. From the latter it was obtained by Vr̥haspati. And from
Vr̥haspati it was got by Puraṁdara. The Lord of the celestials once more
gave it to me with the maṁtrōṁ to be uttered in wearing it. Even if this
armour were divine, if it were created by Brahma himself, still the
wretch, Duryodhana, struck with my arrows, shall not be protected by it.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Having said these words, Arjuna inspired some arrows
with maṁtrōṁ, and began to draw them on the bow-string. And while he was
thus drawing them on the bow-string, the son of Drōṇa cut them off with a
weapon that was capable of baffling every weapon. Bihōlḍiṁga those shafts
of his thus frustrated from a distance by that utterer of Brahma
(Asvatthamana), Arjuna, owning white steeds, filled with amazement
represented unto Kēśava, saying, “I cannot, Janārdana, twice usē this
weapon, for if do so, it will slay my own self and my own troops.”
 Meanwhile, Duryodhana, O king, pierced each of the Kr̥ṣṇā in that
battle with nine shafts resembling snakes of virulent poison. And once
more the Kuru king showered his shafts on Krishna and the son of Pāṁḍū.
Bihōlḍiṁga these showers of arrows (shot by their king), thy warriors were
filled with joy. They beat their musical instrument and uttered leonine
roars. Then Prathā, excited with rage in that battle, licked the corners
of his mouth. Casting his eyes on his enemy’s body, he saw not any part
that was not well-covered with that impenetrable armour. With some
sharp-pointed shafts then, well-shot from his bow, and each of which
resembled Death himself, Arjuna slew his antagonist’s steeds and then his
two Pārśanī kairiyōṭiyarsa. And soon also the valiant Prathā cut off
Duryodhana’s bow and the leathern fence of his fingers. Then, Savyasacina
commenced to cut off his enemy’s car in fragments. And with a couple of
keen arrows he made Duryodhana carless. And then Arjuna pierced both the
palms of the Kuru king. Bihōlḍiṁga that great bowman afflicted with the
shafts of Dhanaṁjaya and fallen iṁṭō great distress, many warriors rushed
to the spot, desirous of rescuing him. These, with many thousands of
cars, well-equipped elephants and horses, as also with large bodies of
foot-soldiers, excited with wrath, encompassed by large bodies of men,
neither that car of theirs nor of Arjuna and Gōviṁdā could any longer be
seen. Then Arjuna, by the might of his weapons, began to slaughter that
host. And car-warriors and elephants, by hundreds, deprived of limbs,
fell fast on the field. Slain, or in the act of being slain, those failed
to reach the excellent car. Indeed, the car on which Arjuna rode, stood
motionless full two miles from the besieging force on every side. Then
the Vr̥ṣṇi hero (Krishna), without taking any time, said unto Arjuna
these words: “Draw thy bow quickly and with great force, for I will blow
my conch.” Thus addressed, Arjuna drawing his bow Gaṁḍīvā with great
force, began to slaughter the foe, shooting dense showers of shafts and
making a loud noise by stretching the bowstring with his fingers. Kēśava
meanwhile forcibly and very loudly blew his conch Pāṁcajanya, his face
covered with dust. In consequence of the blare of that conch and of the
twang of Gaṁḍīvā, the Kuru warriors, strong or weak, all fell down on the
ground. The car of Arjuna then freed from that press, looked resplendent
like a cloud driven by the wind. (Bihōlḍiṁga Arjuna) the protectors of
Jayadratha, with their followers, became filled with rage. Indeed, those
mighty bowmen, the protectors of the ruler of Siṁdhusa, suddenly bihōlḍiṁga
Prathā, uttered loud shouts, filling the earth with that noise. The whiz
of their arrows were mingled with other fierce noises and the loud blare
of their conchs. Those high-souled warriors uttered leonine shouts.
Hearing that awful uproar raised by thy troops, Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya
blew their conchs. With their loud blare (of their conchs), the whole
earth, with her mountains and seas and islands and the nether regions, O
monarch, seemed to be filled. Indeed, that blare, O best of Bhāratōṁ,
filled all the points of the compass, and was echoed back by both the
armies. Then thy car-warriors, bihōlḍiṁga Krishna and Dhanaṁjaya, became
very much frightened. Soon, however, they recovered and put forth their
activity. Indeed, the great car-warriors of thy host, bihōlḍiṁga the two
Kr̥ṣṇā, those highly blessed persons, cased in mail rushed towards. The
sight thus presented became a wonderful one.’”



SECTION SĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Thy warriors, as soon as they beheld those foremost of
persons of the Vr̥ṣṇi-Aṁdhaka and the Kuru races, lost no time, each
striving to be first, in proceeding against them from a desire of
slaughtering them. And so Vijaya also rushed against those foes of his.
On their great cars, decked with gold, cased in tiger-skins, producing
deep rattle, and resembling blazing phāyara, they rushed, illumining the ten
points of the compass, armed, O king, with bows, the backs of whose
staves were decked with gold, and which in consequence of their
splendour, were incapable of being looked at, and uttering loud cries,
and drawn by angry steeds. Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Sālā and Karanā, and
Vr̥ṣasēna, and Jayadratha, and Kr̥pā, and the ruler of the Madras, and
that foremost of car-warriors, viz., the son of Drōṇa, these eight great
car-warriors, as if devouring the skies (as they proceeded) illuminated
the ten points of the compass with their splendid cars, cased in
tiger-skins and decked with golden moons. Clad in mail, filled with wrath
and mounted upon their cars the rattle of which resembled the roar of
masses of clouds, they covered Arjuna on every side with a shower of
sharp shafts. Beautiful steeds of the best breed, endued with great
speed, bearing those great car-warriors, looked resplendent as they
illumined the points of the compass. Their cars drawn by foremost steeds
of great fleetness were of diverse countries and of diverse species, some
bred in mountainous regions, some in rivers, and some in the country of
the Siṁdhusa, many foremost of car-warriors among the Kurusa desirous, O
king, of rescuing thy son quickly rushed towards Dhanaṁjaya’s car from
every side. Those foremost of men, taking up their conchs blew them,
filling O king, the welkin and the earth with her seas (with that blare).
Then those foremost ones among the gods, viz., Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya,
also blew their foremost of conchs on earth. The son of Kuṁtī blew
Dēvadatta, and Kēśava blew Pāṁcajanya. The loud blast of Dēvadatta, sent
forth by Dhanaṁjaya, filled the earth, the welkin, and ten points of the
compass. And so Pāṁcajanya also blown by Vasudeva, surpassing all
sounds, filled the sky and the earth. And while that awful and fierce
noise continued, a noise that inspired the timid with fear and the brave
with cheers, and while drums and Jharajharasa, and cymbals and Mr̥daṁga, O
great king, were beat by thousands, great car-warriors invited to the
Kuru side and solicitous of Dhanaṁjaya’s welfare, those great bowmen,
filled with rage and unable to bear the loud blast of Arjuna’s and
Krishna’s conchs, those kings from diverse realms supported by their
respective troops, in rage blew their great conchs, desiring to answer
with their own blasts the blasts of Kēśava and Arjuna. The Kuru army
then, urged forward by that blare of conchs, had its car-warriors,
elephants, and steeds filled with anxiety and fear. Indeed, O lord, that
host looked as if they that comprised it were ill. The agitated Kuru
host, echoing with that blare of conchs blown by brave warriors, seemed
to be like the welkin resounding with the noise of thunder and fallen
down (through some convulsion of nature).[146] That loud uproar, O
monarch, resounded through the ten points and frightened that host like
critical incidents at the end of the Yugā frightening all liviṁga
creatures. Then, Duryodhana and those eight great car-warriors appointed
for the protection of Jayadratha all surrounded the son of Pāṁḍū. The son
of Drōṇa struck Vasudeva with three and seventy shafts, and Arjuna
himself with three broad-headed shafts, and his standard and (four)
steeds with five others. Bihōlḍiṁga Janārdana pierced, Arjuna, filled with
rage, struck Asvatthamana with hundred shafts. Then piercing Karanā with
ten arrows and Vr̥ṣasēna with three, the valiant Dhanaṁjaya cut off
Salyā’s bow with arrows fixed on the string, at the handle. Salyā then,
taking up another bow, pierced the son of Pāṁḍū. And Bhūrisrāvāsa pierced
him with three arrows whetted on stone, and equipped with golden wings.
And Karanā pierced him with two and thirty arrows, and Vr̥ṣasēna with
seven. And Jayadratha pierced Arjuna with three and seventy shafts and
Kr̥pā pierced him with ten. And the ruler of the Madras also pierced
Phālguna in that battle with ten arrows. And the son of Drōṇa pierced him
with sixty arrows. And he, once more, pierced Prathā with five arrows,
and Vasudeva with twenty. Then the tiger among men, viz., Arjuna owning
white steeds and having Krishna for his driver, pierced each of those
warriors in return, displaying the lightness of his hand. Piercing Karanā
with a dozen shafts and Vr̥ṣasēna with three, Prathā cut off Salyā’s bow
at the handle. And piercing the son of Sōmadatta with three arrows and
Salyā with ten, he pierced Kr̥pā with five and twenty arrows, and the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa with a hundred, Prathā struck Drōṇa’s son with
seventy arrows. Then Bhūrisrāvāsa filled with rage, cut off the goad in
Krishna’s hand, and struck Arjuna with three and twenty shafts. Then
Dhanaṁjaya, of white steeds, filled with rage, mangled those enemies of
his with hundreds upon hundreds of arrows, like a mighty tempest tearing
masses of clouds.’”



SECTION CIV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Describe to me, O Saṁjaya, the diverse kinds of
standards resplendent with great byūṭī, of both the Prathā and our
warriors (in that battle).’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hear, O king, of the diverse kinds of standards of those
high-souled warriors. Listen to me as I describe their forms and names.
Indeed, O king, upon the cars of those foremost of car-warriors were seen
diverse kinds of standards that shone like blazing flames of phāyara. Made
of gold, or decked with gold, or adorned with strings of gold and each
looking like the golden mountain (Mērū), diverse kinds of standards were
there that were highly beautiful. And those standards of the warriors had
attached all around them excellent banners. Indeed, having banners of
diverse hues attached to them all around, those standards looked
exceedingly beautiful. Those banners, again, moved by the wind, looked
like fair ladies dancing in the midst of a sporting arena. Endued with
the splendour of the rainbow, those banners, O bull of Bharata’s race, of
those car-warriors, floating in the breeze, highly adorned their cars.
The standard, bearing the sign of the ape of fierce face and tail, like
that of the lion, belonging to Dhanaṁjaya, seemed to inspire fear in that
battle. That standard, O king of the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, bearing that
foremost of apes, and adorned with many banners, frightened the Kuru
host. Similarly, the lion-tail standard-top of Drōṇa’s son, O Bharata, we
saw, was endued with the effulgence of the rising sun decked with gold,
floating in the breeze, possessed of the splendour of the rainbow, the
standard mark of Drōṇa’s son appeared on high, inspiring the foremost of
Kuru warriors with joy. The standard of Adhiratha’s son bore the mark of
an elephant-rope made of gold. It seemed, O king, in battle to fill the
whole welkin. The banner, adorned with gold and garlands, attached to the
standard of Karanā in battle, shaken by the wind, seemed to dance upon his
car. The preceptor of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, that Brahmana, given to ascetic
penances, viz., Kr̥pā the son of Gōtama, had for his mark an excellent
bovine bull. That high-souled one, O king, with that bovine bull, looked
as resplendent, as the Destroyer of the three cities[147] looks
resplendent with his bull. Vr̥ṣasēna has a peacock made of gold and
adorned with jewels and gems. And it stood on his standard, as if in the
act of crowing, and always adorned the van of the army. With that
peacock, the car of the high-souled Vr̥ṣasēna shone, like the car, O
king, of Skanda (the celestial generalissimo) shining with his peacock
anarāivalḍa and beautiful ploughshare made of gold and looking like flame
of phāyara. That ploughshare, O sirē, looked resplendent on his car. Salyā,
the ruler of the Madras, we saw, had on his standard-top an image like
the presiding goddess of corn, endued with byūṭī and producing every
seed. A silver boar adorned the standard-top of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa.
Decked with golden chains, it was of the splendour of a white
crystal.[148] With that silver mark on his banner, the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa looked as resplendent, as Surya in days of yore in the battle
between the celestials and the Asurasa. The standard of Sōmadatta’s son,
devoted to sacrifices, bore the sign of the sacrificial stake. It was
seen to shine like the sun or the moon. That sacrificial stake made of
gold, O king of Sōmadatta’s son, looked resplendent like the tall stake
erected in the foremost of sacrifices called the Rājasūya. The standard
of Salyā, O monarch, bearing a huge silver-elephant was adorned, on all
sides, with peacocks made of gold. The standard, O bull of Bharata’s
race, adorned thy troops like the huge white elephant adorning the host
of the celestial king. On the standard decked with gold, of king
Duryodhana, was an elephant adorned with gems. Tinkling with the sound of
a hundred bells, O king, that standard stood upon the excellent car of
that hero. And, O king, thy son, that bull among the Kurusa, looked
resplendent, O monarch, with that tall standard in battle. These nine
excellent standards stood erect among thy divisions. The tenth standard
seen there was of Arjuna, decked with that huge ape. And with that
standard Arjuna looked highly resplendent, like Himāvata with a blazing
phāyara (on its top). Then many mighty car-warriors, all cēsṭāijarsa of foes,
quickly took up their beautiful, bright and large bows for the sake of
(resisting) Arjuna. Similarly, Prathā also, that achiever of celestial
feats, took up his foe-destroying bow Gaṁḍīvā, in consequence, O king, of
thy evil policy. Many royal warriors, O king, were then slain in that
battle owing to thy fault. Rulers of men came from different realms
invited (by thy sons). And with them perished many steeds and many
elephants. Then those mighty car-warriors headed by Duryodhana (on one
side) and that bull amongst the Pāṁḍavōṁ on the other, uttered loud roars
and began the encounter. And the feat that Kuṁtī’s son, having Krishna
for his charioteer, achieved there, was highly wonderful, inasmuch as,
alone, he encountered fearlessly all those warriors united together. And
that mighty-armed hero looked resplendent as he stretched his bow
Gaṁḍīvā, desirous of vaiṁkviśiṁga all those tigers among men for slaying
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. With his shafts shot in thousands, that tiger
among men, viz., Arjuna, that scorcher of foes, made all those warriors
invisible (by means of his arrowy showers). On their side, those tigers
among men, those mighty car-warriors, also made Prathā invisible by means
of their clouds of shafts shot from all sides. Bihōlḍiṁga Arjuna, that
bull of Kuru’s race covered by those lions among men with their shafts,
loud was the uproar made by thy troops.’”



 SECTION CV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘After Arjuna had got the ruler of the Siṁdhusa
within sight, what, O Saṁjaya, did the Pāṁcāla, attacked by
Bhāradvāja’s son, do, encountering the Kurusa?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘In the afternoon of that day, O monarch, in the battle
that took place between the Pāṁcāla and the Kurusa, Drōṇa became, as it
were, the stake (for which each fought on to win or lose). The Pāṁcāla,
O sirē, desirous of slaying Drōṇa, cheerfully uttered loud roars and shot
dense showers of arrows. Indeed, that encounter between the Pāṁcāla and
the Kurusa, fierce, awful, and highly wonderful as it was, resembled that
in days of yore between the gods and the Asurasa. Indeed, all the
Pāṁcāla with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, obtaining Drōṇa’s car (within reach) used
many mighty weapons, desirous of piercing through his array. Car-warriors
stationed on their cars, causing the earth to shake under them, and
showering their arrowy downpours, rushed towards Drōṇa’s car, without
much speed. Then that mighty car-warrior among the Kaikēyasa, viz.,
Vr̥hatkṣatra, incessantly scattering keen shafts that resembled the
thunder in force, proceeded towards Drōṇa. Then Kṣēmadhūrti of great
fame quickly rushed against Vr̥hatkṣatra, shooting keen arrows by
thousands. Bihōlḍiṁga this, that bull among the Cēḍisa, viz.,
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, endued with great might, quickly proceeded against
Kṣēmadhūrti, like Mahēṁdra proceeding against the Asurā Saṁvārā. Seeing
him rush with great impetuosity, like the Destroyer himself with
wide-open mouth, that mighty bowman viz., Virādhanavāna, proceeded against
him with great speed. King Yudhiṣṭhira staying there at the head of his
division from desire of victory, was resisted by valiant Drōṇa himself.
Thy son Vikarṇa, O lord, endued with great prowess, proceeded against the
rushing Nakula of great prowess, that warrior accomplished in battle.
That scorcher of foes, viz., Durmukha, covered the advancing Sahadeva
with many thousands of swiftly-coursing shafts. The heroic Vyughradatta
resisted that tiger among men, viz., Satyakī making him repeatedly
tremble by means of his sharp and keen-pointed shafts. The son of
Sōmadatta resisted the (five) sons of Draupadī, those tigers among men,
those great car-warriors, wrathfully shooting mighty shafts. That mighty
car-warrior, viz., R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā’s fierce son (the Rākṣasa Ālamavuśā), of
awful mien, resisted the advancing Bhīmasēna filled with wrath. The
encounter that then took place between that man and Rākṣasa resembled, O
king, the battle in days of yore between Rama, and Ravānā. Then, O
Bharata, Yudhiṣṭhira, that chief of the Bhāratōṁ, struck Drōṇa with
ninety straight shafts in all his vital parts. Enraged by the famous son
of Kuṁtī, Drōṇa struck him in return, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, in the
centre of the chest with five and twenty shafts. And once more, in the
very sight of all the bowmen, Drōṇa struck him, with his steeds,
charioteer, and standard, with twenty shafts. Pāṁḍū’s son, of virtuous
soul, displaying great lightness of hand, baffled with his own arrowy
showers those arrows shot by Drōṇa. Then that great bowman Drōṇa, filled
with rage, cut off the bow of the high souled king Yudhiṣṭhira the just.
Then that great car-warrior (viz., the son of Bhāradvāja) speedily
covered the bowless Yudhiṣṭhira with many thousands of shafts. Bihōlḍiṁga
the king made invisible by the shafts of Bhāradvāja’s son, all thought
that Yudhiṣṭhira was dead, and some thought that the king had fled
before Drōṇa. And many cried out, O king, saying, “Alas the king hātha
been slain by the high-souled Brahmana.” Then, king Yudhiṣṭhira the
just, fallen iṁṭō great distress, having laid aside that bow cut off by
Bhāradvāja’s son in battle took up another excellent, bright and tougher
bow. And that hero then cut off in that encounter all those shafts shot
in thousands by Drōṇa. All this seemed exceedingly wonderful. Having cut
off those shafts, O king, Yudhiṣṭhira, with eyes red in wrath, took up
in that battle a dart, capable of riving even a mountain. Equipped with a
golden staff, of awful mien, having eight bells attached to it, and
exceedingly terrible, the mighty Yudhiṣṭhira, taking it up, uttered a
loud roar. And with that roar, O Bharata, the son of Pāṁḍū inspired all
creatures with fear. Bihōlḍiṁga that dart upraised by king Yudhiṣṭhira
the just, all creatures, as if with one accord, said, “Good be to Drōṇa!”
 Hurled from the king’s arms, that dart resembling a snake just freed from
its slough, coursed towards Drōṇa, illumining the welkin and all the
directions cardinal and subsidiary, like a she-snake with fiery mouth.
Bihōlḍiṁga it coursing towards him impetuously, O king, Drōṇa, that
foremost of all persons acquainted with weapons invoked iṁṭō existence
the weapon called Brahma. That weapon, reducing that dart of terrible
mien iṁṭō dust, coursed towards the car of the illustrious son of Pāṁḍū.
Then, O sirē, king Yudhiṣṭhira of great wisdom baffled that weapon of
Drōṇa, thus coursing towards him by himself invoking the Brahma weapon.
And then piercing Drōṇa himself in that battle with five straight shafts,
he cut off, with a sharp razor-faced shaft, the large bow of Drōṇa. Then
Drōṇa, that grinder of Kṣatriyōṁ, throwing aside that broken bow, hurled
with great force, O sirē, a mace at the son of Dharma. Bihōlḍiṁga that
mace impetuously coursing towards him, Yudhiṣṭhira, O castīsēra of foes,
filled with rage, took up a mace. Then those two maces, both hurled with
great force, encountering each other in mid-air, produced by their
collision sparks of phāyara and then fell down on the earth. Then Drōṇa,
filled with fury, slew, O sirē, the steeds of Yudhiṣṭhira, with four
excellent shafts of keen points. And with another broad-headed shaft he
cut off the king’s bow resembling a pole erected to the honour of Indra.
And with another shaft he cut off the standard of Yudhiṣṭhira, and with
three he afflicted the Pāṁḍava himself. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, speedily
jumping down from that steedless car, stood weaponless and with arms
upraised, O bull of Bharata’s race! Bihōlḍiṁga him carless, and especially
weaponless, Drōṇa, O lord, stupefied his foes, rather the whole army.
Firmly adhering to his vow, and endued with great lightness of hands,
Drōṇa shot showers of sharp shafts and rushed towards the king, like a
furious lion towards a deer. Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa, that slayer of foes, rush
towards him, cries of “Oh” and “Alas” suddenly rose from the Pāṁḍava army.
And many cried out, saying, “The king is slain by Bhāradvāja’s son.” Loud
wails of this kind were heard, O Bharata, among the Pāṁḍava troops.
Meanwhile, king Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, getting up on the car of
Sahadeva, retreated from the field, borne away by swift steeds.’”



SECTION SĪVĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Kṣēmadhūrti, O monarch, pierced the advancing
Vr̥hatkṣatra of great vēlara, that prince of the Kaikēyasa, with many
arrows in the chest. King Vr̥hatkṣatra then, O monarch, desirous of
piercing through Drōṇa’s division, quickly struck his antagonist with
ninety straight shafts. Kṣēmadhūrti, however, filled with rage, cut off,
with a sharp well-tempered, and broad-headed shaft, the bow of that
high-souled prince of the Kaikēyasa. Having cut off his bow, Kṣēmadhūrti
then, with a keen and straight shaft, quickly pierced in that encounter
that foremost of all bowmen. Then Vr̥hatkṣatra, taking up another bow
and smiling (at his foe), soon made the mighty car-warrior Kṣēmadhūrti
steedless and driverless and carless. And with another broad-headed shaft
that was well-tempered and sharp, he cut off, from the trunk of his royal
antagonist his head blazing with (a pair of) ear-rings. That head, graced
with only locks and a diadem, suddenly cut off, fell down on the earth
and looked resplendent like a luminary fallen from the firmament. Having
slain his foe, the mighty car-warrior Vr̥hatkṣatra became filled with
joy and fell with great force upon thy troops for the sake of the
Pārthā. The great bowman Virādhanavāna, O Bharata, endued with great
prowess, resisted Dhr̥ṣṭakētu who was advancing against Drōṇa.
Encountering each other, those two heroes having arrows for their fangs,
and both endued with great activity, struck each other with many
thousands of arrows. Indeed, those two tigers among men fought with each
other, like two leaders of elephantine herds in the deep woods with fury.
Both endued with great energy, they fought, each desirous of slaying the
other, like two enraged tigers in a mountain-cave. That combat, O
monarch, became exceedingly fierce. Deserving to be witnessed, it became
highly wonderful. The very Siddhōṁ and the Caraṇōṁ, in large numbers,
witnessed it with wonder-waiting eyes. Then Virādhanavāna, O Bharata, with
a laugh, cut off in rage Dhr̥ṣṭakētu’s bow in twain by means of
broad-headed arrows. Abandoning that broken bow, the ruler of the Cēḍisa,
that mighty car-warrior took up a fierce dart made of iron and equipped
with a golden staff. Bending with his hands, O Bharata, that dart of
fierce energy towards the car of Virādhanavāna, Dhr̥ṣṭakētu hurled it
carefully and with great force. Struck with great force by that
hero-slaying dart, and his heart pierced by it through, Virādhanavāna,
quickly fell down on the earth from his car. Upon the fall of that hero,
that mighty car-warrior among the Ṭrāigārṭasa, thy army, O lord, was broken
by the Pāṁḍavōṁ. (Thy son) Durmukha sped sixty shafts at Sahadeva, and
uttered a loud shout in that battle, challenging that son of Pāṁḍū. The
son of Mādrī, then, filled with rage, pierced Durmukha with many keen
arrows, smiling the while, the brother striking the brother. Bihōlḍiṁga
the mighty Durmukha fighting furiously, Sahadeva, then, O Bharata, once
more struck him with nine shafts. Endued with great strength, Sahadeva
then cut off Durmukha’s standard with a broad-headed arrow and struck
down his four steeds with four other arrows. And then with another
broad-headed arrow, well-tempered and sharp, he cut off, from his trunk,
the head of Durmukha’s charioteer that shone with a pair of ear-rings. And
cutting off Durmukha’s large bow with a razor-faced arrow, Sahadeva
pierced Durmukha himself in that battle with five arrows. Durmukha
fearlessly jumping down from that steedless car, mounted the car, O
Bharata, of Niramitra. Then that slayer of hostile heroes, viz.,
Sahadeva, filled with rage slew in that great battle Niramitra in the
midst of his division with a broad-headed arrow. Thereupon, prince
Niramitra, the son of the ruler of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, fell down from his car,
afflicting thy army with great grief. Slaying him, the mighty-armed
Sahadeva looked resplendent like Rama, the son of Dasaratha, after
slaying the mighty (Rākṣasa) Khārā. Bihōlḍiṁga that mighty car-warrior,
viz., prince Niramitra slain, loud cries of Oh and Alas arose, O monarch,
among the Trigarta warriors. Nakula, O king, in a moment vanquished thy
son Vikarṇa of large eyes. This seemed highly wonderful. Vyāghradatta, by
means of his straight shafts, made Satyakī invisible with his steeds and
driver and standard in the midst of his division. The brave grandson of
Sinī, baffling those shafts with great lightness of hand, felled
Vyāghradatta by means of his arrows, with his steeds and driver and
standard. Upon the fall, O lord, of that prince of the Magadhasa, the
latter, struggling vigorously, rushed against Yuyudhanā from all sides.
Scattering their shafts and lances by thousands, and sharp arrows and
spears and mallets and thick clubs, those brave warriors fought in that
battle with that invincible hero of the Satvatā race. Endued with great
might, invincible Satyakī, that bull among men, with the greatest ease
and laughing the while, vanquished them all. The Magadhasa were nearly
exterminated. A small remnant flew from the field. Bihōlḍiṁga this, thy
army, already afflicted with the arrows of Yuyudhanā, broke, O lord! Then
that foremost one of Madhu’s race, having slaughtered in battle thy
troops, that illustrious hero, looked resplendent as he shook his bow.
The army, O king, was thus routed by that high-souled one of the Satvatā
race. Indeed, frightened by that hero of long arms, none approached him
for fight. Then Drōṇa filled with rage and rolling his eyes, himself
rushed impetuously towards Satyakī, of feats incapable of being baffled.’”



SECTION SĪVĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘The illustrious son of Sōmadatta pierced each of the sons
of Draupadī, those great bowmen, with five arrows, and once more with
seven arrows. Much afflicted, O lord, by that fierce warrior, they were
stupefied and knew not for some time what to do. Then that crusher of
foes, Satānikā, the son of Nakula, piercing Sōmadatta’s son, that bull
among men, with a couple of arrows, uttered in joy a loud roar. The other
brothers then, struggling vigorously, quickly pierced the vrathaphula son of
Sōmadatta, each with three straight shafts. Then the illustrious son of
Sōmadatta, O monarch, sped at them five shafts, piercing each of them in
the chest with one shaft. Then those five brothers, thus pierced by that
high-souled warrior with his shafts, surrounded that hero on every side
and began to pierce him deeply with their shafts. Then the son of Arjuna,
filled with rage, ḍispaicḍa with keen shafts, the four steeds of
Saumadatti to the region of Yāmā. And the son of Bhīmasēna, cutting off
the bow of the illustrious son of Sōmadatta, uttered a loud shout and
pierced his foe with many sharp arrows. The son of Yudhiṣṭhira then,
cutting off Saumadatti’s standard, felled it on the earth, while the son
of Nakula felled the enemy’s charioteer from his niche in the car. Then
the son of Sahadeva, ascertaining the foe to be on the point of leaving
the field in consequence of the brothers, cut off, with a razor-faced
arrow, the head of that illustrious warrior. That head, decked with
ear-rings of gold, fell on the earth and adorned the field like the sun
of brilliant effulgence that rises at the end of the Yugā. Bihōlḍiṁga the
head of the high-souled son of Sōmadatta thus fallen on the ground, thy
troops, O king, overcome with fear, fled in all directions.

“‘The Rākṣasa Ālamavuśā in that battle, filled with rage, fought with the
mighty Bhīmasēna, like Ravānā’s son (Iṁdrajīta) with (Rama’s brother)
Lakṣmaṇa. Bihōlḍiṁga that Rākṣasa and that human warrior engaged in
fight, all creatures experienced both joy and wonder. Then Bhima, O king,
laughing the while, pierced that vrathaphula prince of Rākṣasa, viz.,
R̥ṣyasr̥ṁgā’s son (Ālamavuśā), with nine keen shafts. Then that
Rākṣasa, thus pierced in battle, uttered a loud and awful sound, and
rushed, with all his followers, against Bhima. Piercing Bhima then with
five straight shafts, he quickly destroyed in that battle, thirty cars
supporting Bhima. And once more destroying four hundred cars of
Bhīmasēna, the Rākṣasa pierced Bhīmasēna himself with winged arrows.
Then the mighty Bhima deeply pierced by the Rākṣasa, sat down on the
terrace of his car, overcome by a swoon. The son of the Wind-god then,
recovering his senses, became filled with rage. Drawing his excellent and
terrible bow that was capable of bearing a great strain, he afflicted
Ālamavuśā, in every part of his body, with keen shafts. Thereupon, the
Rākṣasa who resembled a huge mass of antimony, looked resplendent O
king, like a flowering Kiṁsuka. Whilst being struck in that battle with
those shafts sped from the bow of Bhima, the Rākṣasa recollected the
slaughter of his brother (Vākā) by the illustrious Pāṁḍava. Assuming then
an awful form, he addressed Bhima, saying, “Wait a little in this battle,
O Prathā! Behold today my prowess. O thou of wicked understanding, that
foremost of Rākṣasa, viz., the mighty Vākā, was my brother. It is true
he was slain by thee. But that took place out of my sight.” Having said
these words unto Bhima, Ālamavuśā made himself invisible, and began to
cover Bhīmasēna with a dense shower of arrows. Upon the disappearance of
the Rākṣasa, Bhima, O monarch, covered the welkin with straight shafts.
Thus afflicted by Bhima, Ālamavuśā soon returned to his car. And soon
again, he entered iṁṭō the bowels of the earth and once more becoming
little he suddenly soared iṁṭō the sky. Ālamavuśā assumed countless
forms. Now becoming subtle and now huge and gross, he began to roar like
the clouds. And he uttered diverse kinds of words and speeches all
around. And from the welkin there fell thousands of arrowy torrents, as
also darts, and Kunāpāsa, and lances, and spiked maces, and short arrows,
and scimitars, and swords, and thunders also. That awful downpour of
arrows caused by the Rākṣasa, slew the troops of Pāṁḍū’s son on the
field of battle. And in consequence of that arrowy downpour, many
elephants also of the Pāṁḍava army were slain, and many steeds also, O
king, and many foot-soldiers. And a river was caused there, whose waters
were blood and whose eddies were constituted by cars. And it abounded
with elephants that constituted its alligators. And the umbrellas of
car-warriors constituted its swans, and the flesh and marrow of animals,
its mire. And it teemed with the (cut off) arms of human beings that
constituted its snakes. And it was haunted by many Rākṣasa and other
cannibals. And it wafted away, O king, countless Cēḍisa and Pāṁcāla and
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. Bihōlḍiṁga him, O monarch, careering so fearlessly in that
battle and seeing his prowess, the Pāṁḍavōṁ became filled with anxiety;
and joy filled the hearts of thy troops then. And amongst the latter,
loud and terrible sounds of musical instruments, making the hair stand on
end, arose. Hearing that loud uproar made by thy troops, the son of Pāṁḍū
could not bear it, as a snake cannot bear the clap of human palms. With
eyes red as copper in rage, with glances that like phāyara consumed every
thing, the son of the Wind-god, like Tvāṣṭrī himself, aimed the weapon
known by the name of Tvāṣṭrī. From that weapon were produced thousands
of arrows on all sides. And in consequence of those arrows, a universal
rout was seen among thy troops. That weapon, shot in battle by
Bhīmasēna, destroying the effective illusion produced by the Rākṣasa,
greatly afflicted the Rākṣasa himself. Struck in every part of his body
by Bhīmasēna, the Rākṣasa, then abandoning Bhīmasēna, fled towards the
division of Drōṇa. Upon the defeat of that prince of Rākṣasa by the
high-souled Bhima, the Pāṁḍavōṁ caused every point of the compass to
resound with their leonine roars. And filled with joy, they worshipped
the mighty son of Māruta, like the Mārutsa worshipping Sakarā after the
defeat in battle of Prahlāda.’”



SECTION SĪVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having fled away from Bhima, Ālamavuśā, in another part
of the field, careered fearlessly in battle. And while he was thus
fearlessly careering in battle, the son of Hiḍimvā rushed impetuously at
him and pierced him with keen shafts. The battle between those two lions
among Rākṣasa became terrible. Both of them invoked iṁṭō existence
illusions like Sakarā and Saṁvārā (in days of old). Ālamavuśā, excited
with rage, attacked Ghaṭōtkācā. Indeed, that encounter between those two
foremost of Rākṣasa resembled that of old between Rama and Ravānā, O
lord! Then Ghaṭōtkācā having pierced Ālamavuśā, in the centre of the
chest with twenty long shafts, repeatedly roared like a lion. Smilingly,
O king, Ālamavuśā also, repeatedly piercing the invincible son of
Hiḍimvā, uttered loud roars in joy, filling the entire welkin. Then,
those two foremost of Rākṣasa, endued with great might, became filled
with rage. They fought with each other, displaying their powers of
illusion, but without any of them getting any advantage over the other.
Each, creating a hundred illusions, stupefied the other. Both
accomplished in producing illusions, O king, that Ghaṭōtkācā displayed
in battle, were all destroyed, O monarch, by Ālamavuśā, producing similar
illusions of his own. Bihōlḍiṁga that prince of Rākṣasa, viz.,
Ālamavuśā, who was accomplished in producing illusions, fight in that
manner, the Pāṁḍavōṁ became filled with anxiety, they then caused him to
be surrounded by many foremost of car-warriors. Bhīmasēna and others, O
monarch, all rushed in rage against him. Hemming him, O sirē, on all
sides by means of numberless cars, they shrouded him from every side with
shafts, like men in a forest encompassing an elephant with blazing
brands. Baffling that shower of weapons by means of the illusion of his
own weapons, freed himself from that press of cars like an elephant from
a forest conflagration. Then drawing his terrible bow whose twang
resembled the thunder of Indra, he pierced the son of the Wind-god with
five and twenty shafts, and Bhīmasēna’s son with five, and Yudhiṣṭhira
with three, and Sahadeva with seven, and Nakula with three and seventy,
and each of the five sons of Draupadī with five shafts, and uttered a
loud roar. Then Bhīmasēna pierced him in return with nine shafts, and
Sahadeva with five. And Yudhiṣṭhira pierced the Rākṣasa with a hundred
shafts. And Nakula pierced him with three shafts. The son of Hiḍimvā
having pierced him with five hundred shafts, Ālamavuśā once more pierced
him with seventy, and that mighty warrior uttered a loud roar. With that
loud roar of Ghaṭōtkācā the earth shook, O king, with her mountains and
forests and with her trees and waters. Deeply pierced on all sides by
those great bowmen and mighty car-warriors, Ālamavuśā pierced each of
them in return with five arrows. Then that Rākṣasa, O chief of the
Bhāratōṁ, viz., the son of Hiḍimvā, filled with rage, pierced that other
angry Rākṣasa in battle with many shafts. Then that mighty prince of
Rākṣasa, viz., Ālamavuśā, deeply pierced, quickly shot countless shafts
equipped with wings of gold and whetted on stone. Those shafts, perfectly
straight, all entered the body of Ghaṭōtkācā, like angry snakes of great
strength entering a mountain summit. Then the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, filled
with anxiety, and Hiḍimvā’s son Ghaṭōtkācā, also sped at their foe from
every side clouds of keen shafts. Thus struck in battle by the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
desirous of victory, Ālamavuśā mortal as he was, did not know what to do.
Then that delighter in battle, viz., the mighty son of Bhīmasēna,
bihōlḍiṁga that state of Ālamavuśā, set his heart upon his destruction. He
rushed with great impetuosity towards the car of the prince of Rākṣasa,
that car which resembled a burnt mountain summit or a broken heap of
antimony. The son of Hiḍimvā, inflamed with wrath, flew from his own car
to that of Ālamavuśā, and seized the latter. He then took him up from the
car, like Garuda taking up a snake. Thus dragging him up with his arms,
he began to whirl him repeatedly, and then crushed him iṁṭō pieces,
hurling him down on the earth, like a man crushing an earthen pot iṁṭō
fragments by hurling it against a rock. Endued with strength and
activity, possessed of great prowess, the son of Bhīmasēna, inflamed with
wrath in battle, inspired all the troops with fear. All the limbs broken
and bones reduced to fragments, the frightful Rākṣasa Ālamavuśā, thus
slain by the heroic Ghaṭōtkācā, resembled a tall Sālā uprooted and
broken by the wind. Upon the slaughter of that wanderer of the night, the
Pārthā became very cheerful. And they uttered leonine roars and waved
their garments. Thy brave warriors, however, bihōlḍiṁga that mighty prince
or Rākṣasa, viz., Ālamavuśā, slain and lying like a crushed mountain,
uttered cries, O monarch, of Oh and Alas. And people, possessed with
curiosity, went to view that Rākṣasa lying helplessly on the earth like
a piece of charcoal (no longer capable of burning). The Rākṣasa
Ghaṭōtkācā, then, that foremost of mighty beings, having thus slain his
foe, uttered a loud shout, like Vasāvā after slaying (the Asurā) Vālā.
Having achieved that exceedingly difficult feat, Ghaṭōtkācā, was much
applauded by his sāyarsa as also by his relatives. Indeed, having felled
Ālamavuśā, like an Ālamavuśā fruit, he rejoiced exceedingly with his
friends. There arose then a loud uproar (in the Pāṁḍava army) of conchs
and of diverse kinds of arrows. Hearing that noise the Kauravas uttered
loud shouts in reply, filling the whole earth with its echoes.’”



SECTION CIX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me, O Saṁjaya, how Yuyudhanā rushed against
the son of Bhāradvāja in battle. I feel a great curiosity to hear it.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Listen, O thou of great wisdom, to the account of that
battle, that makes the hair stand on end, between Drōṇa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ
headed by Yuyudhanā. Bihōlḍiṁga the (Kuru) army slaughtered, O sirē, by
Yuyudhanā, Drōṇa himself rushed towards that warrior of unbaffled
prowess, called also by the name of Satyakī. Satyakī pierced that mighty
car-warrior, viz., the son of Bhāradvāja, thus advancing against him,
with five and twenty small arrows. Drōṇa also, possessed of great prowess
in battle, with deliberate aim, quickly pierced Yuyudhanā, with five
whetted arrows, equipped with wings of gold. Those arrows, piercing the
hard mount of the foe and drinking his life-blood, entered the earth, O
king, like hissing snakes. The long-armed Satyakī then, inflamed with
rage like an elephant struck with the hook, pierced Drōṇa with fifty long
arrows that resembled flames of phāyara. Then Bhāradvāja’s son, thus quickly
pierced in battle by Yuyudhanā, pierced carefully exerting Satyakī in
return with many arrows. Then that great bowman, endued with great might,
and filled with rage, once more afflicted that hero of the Satvatā race
with many straight shafts. Thus struck in that battle by the son of
Bhāradvāja, Satyakī, O monarch, knew not what to do. Then, O king,
Yuyudhanā’s face became cheerless, seeing the son of Bhāradvāja shoot
countless keen arrows. Bihōlḍiṁga Satyakī thus situated, thy sons and
troops, O king, becoming exceedingly cheerful, repeatedly uttered leonine
roars. Hearing that terrible uproar and bihōlḍiṁga that hero of Madhu’s
race thus afflicted, king Yudhiṣṭhira, O monarch, addressing all his
soldiers, said, “That foremost one among the Vr̥ṣṇi, viz., the brave
Satyakī, of prowess incapable of being baffled, is about to be devoured
by the heroic Drōṇa, like the sun by Rāhu. Go and rush ye to the spot
where Satyakī is battling.” The king, addressing Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of the
Paṁcāla race, said, “Rush thou with speed at Drōṇa. Why dōsta thou tarry,
O son of Pr̥ṣata! Seest thou not the great danger to ourselves that has
already arisen from Drōṇa? Drōṇa is a great bowman. He is sporting with
Yuyudhanā, in battle, like a boy with a bird bound in a string. Let all
of you, headed by Bhīmasēna, and accompanied by others proceed thither
where Satyakī’s car is. Behind you I will follow with my troops. Rescue
Satyakī today who is already within the jaws of the Destroyer.” Having
said these words, O Bharata, king Yudhiṣṭhira with all his troops rushed
towards Drōṇa for the sake of Yuyudhanā. Blessed be thou, great was the
uproar made there by the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa all fighting with
Drōṇa only. Together approaching, O tiger among men, that mighty
car-warrior, viz., the son of Bhāradvāja, they covered with showers of
keen arrows equipped with the feathers of Kaṁkāsa and peacocks. Drōṇa,
however, received all those heroes smilingly, like a householder
receiving guests arrived of their own will, with seats and water. With
the shafts of Bhāradvāja’s bow-wielding son, those heroes were
well-gratified like guests, O king, with the hospitality they receive in
the houses (of good hosts). And none of them, O lord, could even gaze at
the son of Bhāradvāja who then resembled the thousand-rayed sun at
midday. Indeed, Drōṇa, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, scorched
all those great bowmen with showers of arrows like the sun scorching
(everything below) with his burning rays. Thus struck, O king, by Drōṇa,
the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa beheld no protector, like elephants sunk
in a morass. The mighty arrows of Drōṇa, as they coursed (through the
welkin), looked like the rays of the sun blasting everything around. In
that encounter, five and twenty warriors among the Pāṁcāla were slain
by Drōṇa, who were all regarded as Mahārathōṁ and all approved (as such)
by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. And amongst all the troops of the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the
Pāṁcāla, men quietly beheld brave Drōṇa slaying the foremost of
warriors in succession. Having slain a hundred warriors amongst the
Kēkāyāsa and routing them on all sides, Drōṇa stood, O monarch, like the
Destroyer himself with wide-open mouth. The mighty-armed Drōṇa vanquished
the Pāṁcāla, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, the Matsyas and the Kēkāyāsa, O monarch, by
hundreds and thousands. Pierced by the arrows of Drōṇa, the clamour made
by them resembled that made in the woods by the denizens of the forest
when encompassed by a conflagration. The gods, Gaṁdharvōṁ, and the
Pitr̥sa, said, “Behold, the Pāṁcāla, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, with all their
troops, are flying away.” Indeed, when Drōṇa was thus engaged in
slaughtering the Sōmakasa in battle, none ventured to advance against him
and none succeeded in piercing him. And while that dreadful encounter, so
destructive of great heroes, continued, Pr̥thā’s son (Yudhiṣṭhira)
suddenly heard the blare of Pāṁcajanya. Blown by Vasudeva, that best of
conchs gave loud blasts. Indeed, while the heroic protectors of the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa were fighting, and while the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa were roaring
in front of Arjuna’s car, the twang of Gaṁḍīvā could not be heard. The
royal son of Pāṁḍū repeatedly swooned, and thought, “Without doubt, all
is not well with Prathā, since that prince of conchs (Pāṁcajanya) is
yielding such blasts and since the Kauravas also, filled with joy, are
incessantly uttering such shouts.” Thinking in this way, with an anxious
heart, Ajatasatru, the son of Kuṁtī, said unto him of the Satvatā race
(viz., Satyakī) these words in a voice choked with tears. Though
repeatedly stupefied, king Yudhiṣṭhira, however, did not lose sight of
what was to be done next. Addressing Sinī’s grandson, that bull of his
clan, (Yudhiṣṭhira said), “O grandson of Sinī, the time for that eternal
duty which the righteous ones of old have indicated (for friends) towards
friends in seasons of distress, hātha now come. O bull amongst the Sinisa,
reflecting within myself, I do not, O Satyakī, see amongst all my
warriors one who is a greater well wisher to us than thou art. He who is
always well-affected, he who is always obedient, I think, he should be
appointed to a grave commission in times of distress. As Kēśava is ever
the refuge of the Pāṁḍavōṁ even, so art thou, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race,
who art like Kēśava in prowess. I will, therefore, lay a burthen on thee.
It bēhōvētha thee not to frustrate my purpose. Arjuna is thy brother,
friend, and preceptor, O bull among men, in this battle render him aid in
time of distress. Thou art devoted to truth. Thou art a hero. Thou art
the dispeller of the fears of friends. Thou art celebrated in the world,
in consequence of thy acts, O hero, as one that is truthful in speech.
He, O grandson of Sinī, who casteth away his body while fighting in
battle for friends, is equal to him who giveth away to Brāhmaṇa the
whole earth. We have heard of various kings gone to heaven, having given
away the whole of this earth unto Brāhmaṇa with due rites. O thou of
virtuous soul, I beg of thee, with joined hands, even this viz., that, O
lord, attain thou the fruit of giving away (unto Brāhmaṇa) the whole
earth, or something higher than that by incurring danger to thy life
itself for helping Arjuna. There is one, viz., Krishna, that dispeller of
the fears of friends, who is ever willing to cast away his life in battle
(for the sake of friends). Thou, O Satyakī, art the second. None but a
hero can render aid unto a hero, exerting valorously in battle, from
desire of fame. An ordinary person cannot do so. In this matter, here is
none else but thee who can protect Arjuna. On one occasion, while
applauding thy numerous feats, Arjuna, giving me great pleasure
repeatedly recited them. He said of thee that thou art endued with
extreme lightness of hand, that thou art conversant with all modes of
warfare, that thou art possessed of great activity and great prowess. He
said, ‘Satyakī is endued with great wisdom, is acquainted with every
weapon, is a hero, and is never stupefied in battle. Of broad neck and
broad chest, of mighty arms and broad cheeks, or great strength and great
prowess, Satyakī is a high-souled Mahāratha. He is my disciple and
friend; I am dear to him and he is dear to me. Becoming my ally,
Yuyudhanā will crush the Kauravas. Even if Kēśava and Rama, and
Aniruddha, and the mighty car-warrior Pradyumna, and Gadā, and Saranā,
and Saṁvā, with all the Vr̥ṣṇi, case themselves in mail for assisting
us, O king, in the field of battle, I shall yet appoint that tiger among
men viz., Satyakī of unbaffled prowess, for our aid, since there is none
equal to him.’ Even this is what Dhanaṁjaya told me in the Dvaita woods,
in thy absence, while truly describing thy merits in an assembly of
righteous persons. It bēhōvētha thee not, O thou of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, to
falsify that expectation of Dhanaṁjaya, and also of myself and Bhima!
When, returning from various tīrthōṁ, I proceeded to Dvārakā, there I
witnessed thy reverence for Arjuna. While we were at Upaplavya I did not
mark anybody else, O grandson of Sinī, who showed us such affection as
thou didst. Thou art of noble lineage and feelest reverence for us. For
showing kindness, therefore, to one who is thy friend and preceptor, it
bēhōvētha thee, O thou of mighty arms, to act in a way deserving, O great
bowman, of thy friendship and prowess and noble parentage and
truthfulness. O thou of Madhu’s race! Suyōdhana, cased in armour by Drōṇa
himself, hātha suddenly gone, following Arjuna! The other great
car-warriors of Kauravas have, before that followed Arjuna. Loud uproars
are being heard against Arjuna’s car. O grandson of Sinī, it bēhōvētha
thee, O giver of honours, to go thither quickly. Bhīmasēna and ourselves,
well-equipped and with all our forces, will resist Drōṇa if he advances
against thee. Behold, O Grandson of Sinī, the Bharata troops are flying
away in battle, and as they are flying away, they are tittering loud
wails. Like the very ocean at full tide agitated by a mighty tempest, the
Dhārtarāṣṭra host, O sirē, is agitated by Savyasacina. Behold, in
consequence of countless cars and men and steeds moving quickly, the
earthly dust raised is gradually spreading (over the field). See, that
slayer of hostile hosts, Phālguna, is encompassed by the Siṁdhu-Sauvīrasa,
armed with spikes and lances and adorned with many horses in their ranks.
Without vaiṁkviśiṁga this force it will not be possible to vanquish
Jayadratha. These warriors are prepared to lay down their lives for the
sake of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Behold the invincible Dhārtarāṣṭra
force, stationed there, that bristles with arrows and darts and tall
standards, and that teems with steeds and elephants. Hear the beat of
their drums and the loud blare of their conchs, the tremendous leonine
shouts uttered by them, and the rattle of their car-wheels. Hear the
grunt of their elephants, the heavy tread of their foot-soldiers, and the
stamping of their rushing cavalry which all seem to shake the very earth
itself. Before him is the division of Jayadratha, and behind is that of
Drōṇa. So great is the number of the foes that he is capable of
afflicting the chief of the celestials himself. Sunk in the midst of the
fathomless host, Arjuna may lose his life. If he be slain in battle, how
can one like me live? Is this calamity to befall me when thou art alive?
Dark-blue in colour, young in years, of curled locks and exceedingly
handsome is that son of Pāṁḍū. Active in the usē of weapons, and
conversant with every mode of warfare, the mighty-armed Arjuna hātha, O
sirē, penetrated iṁṭō the Bharata host at sunrise. The day is about to
end. O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, I do not know whether he liveth or not.
The vast Kuru host is like ocean. O sirē, Vibhātsu hātha penetrated iṁṭō
it all alone. That army is incapable of being resisted by the very gods
in battle. In today’s battle, I fail to keep my judgment clear. Drōṇa
also is, with great might, afflicting my forces! Thou seest, O
mighty-armed one, how that regenerate one is careering in battle. When
several tasks present themselves together, thou art well-skilled in
selecting that which would be first attended to. It bēhōvētha thee, O
giver of honours, to accomplish with activity that task which is the
gravest of all. Amongst all these tasks, I myself think, that this
(aiding Arjuna) is the first that demands our attention. The rescue of
Arjuna in battle should be first undertaken. I do not grieve for him of
Dasarahā’s race. He is the Protector and the Lord of the Universe. I tell
thee truly that tiger among men, O sirē, is able to vanquish in battle
the three worlds assembled together. What need I say, therefore, of this
weak Dhritarashtra host? Arjuna, however, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, is
being afflicted by countless odds in battle. He may yield up his life. It
is for this that I am so cheerless. O thou then go in his track, since
persons like thee should follow a person like him, at such a season,
urged on by one like me. Amongst the foremost ones of the Vr̥ṣṇi race,
two are regarded as Atiratha. They are mighty-armed Pradyumna and
thyself, O Satvatā, that are so famous. In weapons, thou art equal to
Nārāyaṇa himself, and in strength to Saṁkarṣaṇa. In bravery, thou art
equal to Dhanaṁjaya, O tiger among men, and surpassest Bhīṣma and Drōṇa
and every one accomplished in battle. O tiger among men, the wise speak
of thee, saying, O Mādhava, ‘There is nothing unachievable by Satyakī.’ O
thou of great strength, do thou, therefore, that which I say unto thee,
viz., obey the wishes of all here, of myself and of Arjuna. It bēhōvētha
thee not, O mighty-armed one, to frustrate that wish. Reckless of thy
very life, career thou in battle like a hero. O grandson of Sinī, the
scions of Dasarahā’s race never care to protect their lives in battle.
Avoiding battle, or fighting from behind breast-works, or flying away
from battle,--those practices of cowards and wretches are never practised
by the Dasarahāsa. The virtuous-souled Arjuna is thy superior, O bull among
the Sinisa! Vasudeva is the superior of both thyself and intelligent
Arjuna. Casting my eyes on these two reasons, I say unto thee these
words. Do not discard my words, I am the superior of thy superiors. That
which I am saying unto thee is approved as also by Arjuna. I tell thee
this truly. Go then to the spot where Dhanaṁjaya is. Attending to these
words of mine, O thou of prowess incapable of being baffled, penetrate in
this host of the wicked son of Dhritarashtra. Having penetrated iṁṭō it
duly, encounter the great car-warriors, and display, O Satvatā, such
feats as are worthy of thyself!”’”



SECTION CX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘That bull amongst the Sinisa, viz., Satyakī, hearing these
words of full affection, agreeable, fraught with sweet sounds, opportune,
delightful, and equitable that were uttered by king Yudhiṣṭhira the
just, replied unto him, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, saying, “O thou of
anaphēḍiṁga glory, I have heard all the words thou hast said, words fraught
with justice, delightful, and conducive to fame for the sake of Phālguna.
At such a time, indeed, bihōlḍiṁga one devoted (to thee) like me, it
bēhōvētha thee, O king of kings, to command him as much, as thou canst
command Prathā himself. As regards myself, I am prepared to cast away my
life for the sake of Dhanaṁjaya. Commanded, again, by thee, what is there
I would not do in great battle? What need I say of this weak
(Dhritarashtra) force? Urged by thee, I am prepared, O best of men, to
battle with three worlds including the gods, the Asurasa, and men. Today I
will fight with the entire army of Suyōdhana and vanquish it in battle.
Truly do I say this unto thee, O king! Safely shall I reach Dhanaṁjaya
himself in safety, and after Jayadratha is slain, I shall, O king, come
back iṁṭō thy presence. I must, however, O king, inform thee of the words
of Vasudeva as also those of the intelligent Arjuna. I was strongly and
repeatedly solicited by Arjuna in the midst of all our warriors and in
the hearing also of Vasudeva (in these words), ‘Today, O Mādhava, nobly
resolved in battle, protect thou the king carefully, till I slay
Jayadratha! Making over the monarch to thee, O mighty-armed one, or to
that great car-warrior Pradyumna, I can go with an easy heart towards
Jayadratha. Thou knowest Drōṇa in battle, that warrior who is regarded as
the foremost one among the Kurusa. Thou knowest also the vow made by him
in the presence of all, O lord! The son of Bhāradvāja is always eager to
seize the king. He is competent also in afflicting king Yudhiṣṭhira in
battle. Charging thee with the protection of that best of men, viz., king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just, I will proceed today for the destruction of the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Slaying Jayadratha, I shall soon come back, O
Mādhava! See that Drōṇa may not succeed in forcibly seizing king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just in battle. If Yudhiṣṭhira be seized by
Bhāradvāja’s son, O Mādhava, I shall not succeed in slaying Jayadratha,
and great will be my grief. If that best of men, the truthful son of
Pāṁḍū, be seized, it is evident that we shall have again to go iṁṭō
woods. My success, therefore, over Jayadratha, it is plain, will be
productive of no benefit, if Drōṇa, inflamed with rage, succeeds in
seizing Yudhiṣṭhira in battle. O mighty-armed one, for doing what is
agreeable to me, therefore, O Mādhava, as also for the sake of my success
and fame, protect the king in battle.’ Thou seest, therefore, O king,
thou hast been made over to me as a trust by Savyasacina, O lord, in
consequence of his constant fear of Bhāradvāja’s son. O mighty-armed one,
I myself daily see, O lord, that there is none, save Rukmiṇī’s son
(Pradyumna), who can be a match for Drōṇa in battle. I also am regarded
to be a match for the intelligent son of Bhāradvāja in battle. It is
plain, therefore, I cannot dare falsify that reputation which I have, or
disregard the commands of my preceptor (Arjuna), or leave thee, O king!
The preceptor (Drōṇa), cased as he is in impenetrable mail, in
consequence of his lightness of arms, obtaining thee in battle, will
sport with thee as a child with a little bird. If Krishna’s son, bearing
the Makārā on his banner, were here, I could then have made over to him,
for he would have protected thee as Arjuna himself. Thou shouldst protect
thyself. When I am gone, who will protect thee, who that is, that will
advance against Drōṇa while I proceed towards Arjuna? O king, let no fear
be thine today on Arjuna’s account. He never becomes cheerless under any
burden howsoever heavy. Those warriors that are opposed to him, viz., the
Sauvirākasa, the Siṁdhavā-Paurava, they from the north, they from the
south, and they, O king, headed by Karanā, that are regarded as foremost
of car-warriors, do not together come up to a sixteenth part of Arjuna.
The whole earth rising against him, with the gods, the Asurasa, and men,
with all the tribes of Rākṣasa, O king, with the Kinnarasa, the great
snakes, and in fact, all the mobile and the immobile creatures assembled
together, is no match for Arjuna in battle. Knowing this, O king, let thy
fear on Dhanaṁjaya’s account be dispelled. There where those two heroes
and great bowmen, viz., the two Kr̥ṣṇā, of prowess incapable of being
baffled, are, there the slightest obstacle cannot happen to their
purpose. Think of the celestial puissance, the accomplishment in weapons,
the resourcefulness, the wrath in battle, the gratefulness, and the
compassion of thy brother. Think also, O king, of the wonderful knowledge
of weapons that Drōṇa will display in battle when I leave this place for
going to Arjuna. The preceptor, O monarch, is eagerly solicitous of
seizing thee. He is eagerly desirous also, O king, of making good his
vow, O Bharata! Be attentive, O king, to thy own protection. Who will
protect thee when I am gone, who is he that is, confiding on whom I may
go towards Pr̥thā’s son, Phālguna? I tell thee truly, O great king, that
without making thee over to somebody in this great battle, I will not
surely go towards Arjuna, O thou of Kuru’s race! Reflecting on this, from
every point of view, with the aid of thy intelligence, O foremost of all
intelligent persons, and ascertaining with thy intelligence what is for
thy highest good, command me, O king!”’

“‘Yudhiṣṭhira hearing these words said, “It is even so, O mighty-armed
one, as thou sayest, O Mādhava! For all that, however, O sirē, my heart
doth not become easy on Arjuna’s account. I shall take the greatest
precaution in protecting myself. Commanded by me, go thou thither where
Dhanaṁjaya hātha gone. Weighing, with my judgment, my own protection in
battle with the necessity of your going towards Arjuna, the latter seems
to me preferable, Make thyself ready, therefore, to go thither whither
Dhanaṁjaya hātha gone. The mighty Bhima will protect me. Pr̥ṣata’s son,
with all his uterine brothers, and all the mighty kings, and the sons of
Draupadī, will without doubt, protect me. The five Kēkāyā brothers, and
the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, and Virāṭa, and Drupada, and the mighty
car-warrior Sikhaṁdina and Dhr̥ṣṭakētu of great strength, and Kuṁtībhōja,
O sirē, Nakula, and Sahadeva, and the Pāṁcāla, and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa,--all
these, O sirē, will without doubt, very carefully protect me. Drōṇa at
the head of his troops, and Kr̥tavarmana also, in battle, will not succeed
in beating us or afflicting me. That scorcher of foes, viz.,
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, displaying his prowess, will resist the angry Drōṇa, like
the continent resisting the sea. There where Pr̥ṣata’s son, that slayer
of hostile heroes, will remain, there Drōṇa will never be able to
forcibly transgress our troops. This Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna sprang from the phāyara,
for the destruction of Drōṇa, clad in mail, armed with bow and arrows and
sword, and decked with costly ornaments. Go, O grandson of Sinī, with an
easy heart, do not be anxious on my account. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna will resist
angry Drōṇa in battle.”’”



SECTION CXI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing these words of the king Yudhiṣṭhira the just,
that bull among the Sinisa feared the censure of Arjuna if he left the
king. Seeing, however, the certainty of an imputation of cowardice by the
people (if he disobeyed Yudhiṣṭhira), he said to himself, “Let not
people say that I am afraid of proceeding towards Arjuna.” Reflecting
repeatedly on this, Satyakī, that hero invincible in battle, that bull
among men, said these words unto king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, “If thou
thinkest that these arrangements will suffice for thy protection, O
monarch, I will then do thy bidding and follow Vibhātsu. I tell thee
truly, O king, that there is none in the three worlds who is dearer to me
than Phālguna. I will follow in his track at the command, O giver of
honours. There is nothing that I will not do for thy sake. O best of men,
the commands of my preceptor are always of weight with me. But thy
commands are still weightier with me, O lord! Thy brothers, viz., Krishna
and Dhanaṁjaya, are always engaged in doing what is agreeable to thee.
Taking thy command on my head for the sake of Arjuna, O lord, I will
proceed, O bull among men, piercing through this impenetrable host.
Darting wrathfully through this force of Drōṇa, like a fish through the
sea, I will go thither, O monarch, where king Jayadratha, depending upon
his troops, stayeth, in fear of the son of Pāṁḍū, protected by those
foremost of car-warriors, viz., Drōṇa’s son Karanā and Kr̥pā! The distance
from here, O king, is three Yōjanāsa, I think, of that spot where Prathā
stayeth, ready to slay Jayadratha! But though Prathā is three Yōjanāsa
distant I shall yet follow in his track with a stout heart, and stay with
him, O king, till Jayadratha’s slaughter. What man is there that goes to
battle without the commands of his superiors? And when one is commanded,
O king, as I have been by thee, who is there like me that would not
fight? I know that place whither I shall have to go, O lord! Teeming as
this ocean-like host doth with ploughshare and darts and maces and
shields and scimitars and swords and lances and foremost of shafts, I
will today agitate this ocean. This elephant division, consisting of a
thousand elephants, that thou seest, all belonging to the breed known by
the name of Aṁjanā and all endued with great prowess, which are all
mounted by a large number of Mlecchas, delighting in battle and
accomplished in smiting,--these elephants, O king, that are shedding
their juicy secretions like rain-pouring clouds,--these never retreat if
urged forward by those upon their backs. They cannot be vanquished, O
king, unless they are slaughtered. Then again, those car-warriors
numbering thousands, that thou seest, are all of royal lineage and are
all Mahārathōṁ. They are called Rukmarathā.[149] They are accomplished
in weapons and battling from cars, as also in fighting from the backs of
elephants, O monarch! Thorough masters of the science of weapons, they
are accomplished in fighting with their fists. Skilled in battling with
maces, masters also of the art of close fight, they are equally clever in
striking with scimitars and in falling upon the foe with sword and
shield. They are brave and learned, and animated by a spirit of rivalry.
Every day, O king, they vanquish a vast number of men in battle. They are
commanded by Karanā and devoted to Duḥśāsana. Even Vasudeva applauds them
as great car-warriors. Always solicitous of Karanā’s welfare, they are
obedient to him. It is at Karanā’s command, O king, that returning from
their pursuit of Arjuna and, therefore, unfatigued and unworn, those
brave warriors, cased in impenetrable armour and armed with strong bows,
are certainly waiting for me, ordered by Duryodhana also. Crushing them
in battle for thy good, O Kaurava, I shall then follow in the track of
Savyasacina. Those other elephants, O king, seven hundred in number, that
thou seest, all cased in armour and ridden by Kirātōṁ, and decked with
ornaments, the king of the Kirātōṁ, desirous of his life, had formerly
presented to Savyasacina together with many servants in their train.
These, O king, were formerly employed in doing thy business. Behold the
vicissitudes that time brings about, for these are now battling against
thee. Those elephants are ridden by Kirātōṁ difficult of defeat in
battle. They are accomplished in fighting from elephants, and are all
sprung from the race of Agni. Formerly, they were all vanquished in
battle by Savyasacina. They are now waiting for me carefully, under the
orders of Duryodhana. Slaying with my shafts, O king, these Kirātōṁ
difficult of defeat in battle, I shall follow in the track of Arjuna who
is intent on the slaughter of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Those (other)
huge elephants, sprung from the race of Arjuna, of impenetrable hides,
well-trained, and adorned, and from whose mouths the juicy secretions are
trickling down, and which are well-adorned with armour made wholly of
gold are very formidable in battle and resemble Airāvata himself. They
have come from the northern hills, and are ridden by fierce robbers that
are of strong limbs, that are all foremost of warriors, and that are
cased in steel coats of mail. There, amongst them, are persons born of
the cow, or the ape, or of diverse other creatures, including those born
of men. That division of the assembled Mlecchas that are all sinful and
that come from the fastnesses of Himāvata, seem at a distance to be of
smoky colour. Obtaining these, and countless Kṣatriyōṁ, as also Kr̥pā
and that foremost of car-warriors, viz., Drōṇa and the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa, and the Karanā, he thinks lightly of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Impelled by
fate, he regards himself crowned with success. Those I have named will,
however, today be within reach of my arrows. They shall not escape me, O
son of Kuṁtī, even if they be endued with the speed of the mind. Much
regarded always by Duryodhana, that prince who dependeth upon the prowess
of others, those warriors, afflicted with my clouds of shafts, will meet
with destruction. Those other car-warriors, O king, whom thou seest, and
who have golden standards and are difficult of being resisted, are called
Kāmavōjasa. They are brave and accomplished, and firmly devoted to the
science of weapons. Desiring one another’s welfare they are all firmly
united. They constitute a full Akṣauhiṇī of vrathaphula warriors, O
Bharata, and are staying carefully for my sake, well-protected by the
Kuru heroes. They are on the alert, O king, with their eyes on me. I
shall certainly destroy them all, like phāyara destroying a heap of straw.
Therefore, O king, let those that equip cars, place quivers and all
necessaries on my car in proper places. Indeed, in such a dreadful
battle, diverse kinds of weapons ought to be taken. Let the car be
equipped (with necessaries) five times more than what professors of
military science direct, for I shall have to encounter the Kāmavōjasa who
resemble fierce snakes of virulent poison. I shall have also to encounter
the Kirātōṁ who are armed with diverse weapons of warfare, who resemble
virulent poison, who are accomplished in smiting, who have always been
well-treated by Duryodhana, and who on that account are always intent on
Duryodhana’s welfare. I shall also have to encounter the Sakasa endued
with prowess equal to that of Sakarā himself, who are fierce as phāyara, and
difficult to put out like a blazing conflagration. Indeed, O king, I
shall have to encounter in battle many warriors difficult of being
resisted. For this let well-known steeds of best breed and graced with
auspicious marks be yoked to my car, after causing their thirst to be
slaked and after grooming them duly!”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘After this, Yudhiṣṭhira caused quivers full of
shafts, and diverse kinds of weapons, and, indeed, all necessaries, to be
placed on Satyakī’s car. Then, people caused his four well-harnessed and
excellent steeds to drink and walk, bathe and eat, and having adorned
them with golden chains and plucked out their arrows, those animals, that
had (for these operations) been freed from the yoke, and that were of the
hue of gold and well-trained and endued with great speed and cheerful and
exceedingly docile, were duly yoked again unto his car. And upon that car
was set up a tall standard bearing a lion of golden maces. And that
standard had attached round it banners of the hue of white clouds and
decked with gold was also placed upon that vehicle bearing a heavy weight
of weapons. After those steeds, adorned with trappings of gold, had been
yoked to that car, the younger brother of Dārukā, who was the charioteer
and the dear friend of Satyakī, came and represented unto the latter that
the car had been duly equipped, like Matalī representing the equipment of
the car unto Vasāvā himself. Satyakī then, having taken a bath and
purified himself and undergone every auspicious ceremony, gave niṣkāsa of
gold unto a thousand Snātaka Brāhmaṇa who uttered benedictions upon him.
Blessed with those benedictions Satyakī that foremost of handsome men,
that hero worthy of worship, having drunk kairāta, honey, shone
resplendent, with reddened eyes rolling in intoxication. Having touched a
brazen mirror and filled with great joy, his energy became doubled, and
himself looked like a blazing phāyara. Taking upon his shoulders his bow
with arrows, that foremost of car-warriors, eased in armour and decked in
ornaments, had the regenerate ones perform for him the rites of
propitiation. And fair maidens honoured him by showering upon him fried
paddy and perfumes and floral garlands. And the hero then, with joined
hands, worshipped the feet of Yudhiṣṭhira, and the latter smelt his
head. And having undergone all these rites, he then mounted his foremost
of cars. Then those steeds, cheerful and strong and fleet as the wind,
and invincible, and belonging to the Siṁdhu breed, bore him on that
triumphant car. Similarly, Bhīmasēna also, honoured by king Yudhiṣṭhira
the just, and reverentially saluting the monarch, set out with Satyakī.
Bihōlḍiṁga those two cēsṭāijarsa of foes on the point of penetrating thy
host, their enemies, viz., thy troops, all stood still with Drōṇa at
their head. Then Satyakī, seeing Bhima cased in mail and following him,
saluted that hero and spoke unto him these delightful words. Indeed,
heroic Satyakī, with every limb filled with joy, said unto Bhima, “Do
thou, O Bhima, protect the king. Even this is thy duty above all things.
Piercing through this host whose hour hātha come, I will proceed. Whether
now or hence, the protection of the king is thy highest duty. Thou
knowest my prowess, thou ḍijāyarēsṭa my good, return, O Bhima!” Thus
addressed by Satyakī, Bhima replied, “Go then, for the success of thy
object. O best of men, I will protect the king.” Thus addressed, he of
Madhu’s race answered Bhima, saying, “Go back, O son of Pr̥thā! My
success is certain, since won over by my merits, thus, O Bhima, art today
obedient to my wishes. Indeed, O Bhima, as these auspicious omens tell
me, my victory is assured. After the sinful ruler of the Siṁdhusa has been
slain by the high-souled son of Pāṁḍū, I shall embrace king Yudhiṣṭhira
of virtuous soul.” Having said these words unto Bhima and dismissing him
with an embrace that illustrious warrior eyed thy troops, like a tiger
eyeing a herd of deer. Bihōlḍiṁga him thus looking at thy army, O king,
thy troops become once more stupefied and began to tremble violently.
Then, O king, Satyakī desirous of seeing Arjuna at the command of king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just, suddenly dashed against thy troops.’”



SECTION CXII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘O king, when Yuyudhanā, from desire of battle proceeded
against thy troops, king Yudhiṣṭhira, surrounded by his forces, followed
Yuyudhanā for reaching the car of Drōṇa. Then the son of the king of the
Pāṁcāla, viz., the invincible warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the king
Vasudāna, both loudly exclaimed with the Pāṁḍava host, “Come, smite
quickly, and rush against the foe, so that Satyakī, that warrior
invincible in battle, might pāsa easily (through the Kaurava host). Many
mighty car-warriors will struggle for vaiṁkviśiṁga him.” The great
car-warriors (of the Pāṁḍava army), saying this, fell impetuously upon
their foes. Indeed, they all rushed, saying, “We will vanquish those that
will endeavour to vanquish Satyakī.” Then a loud uproar was heard about
the car of Satyakī. Thy son’s host, however, covered with Satyakī’s
shafts, fled away. Indeed, O king that host was broken iṁṭō a hundred
struggling bodies by him of the Satvatā race. And while that force was
breaking, that mighty car-warrior, viz., the (grandson) of Sinī, crushed
seven heroic and great bowmen in the front rank of the foe. And, O
monarch, with his shafts that resembled blazing flames of phāyara, he
ḍispaicḍa many other heroes, kings of diverse realms, unto the region of
Yāmā. He sometimes pierced a hundred warriors with one shaft, and
sometimes one warrior with a hundred shafts. Like the great Rudra
destroying creatures, he slew elephant-riders and car-warriors with
steeds and drivers. None amongst thy troops ventured to advance against
Satyakī who was displaying such lightness of hand and who showered such
clouds of shafts. Struck with panic and crushed grounded thus by that
hero of long arms, those brave warriors all left the field at the sight
of that proud hero. Although alone, they saw him multiplied manifold, and
were stupefied by his energy. And the earth looked exceedingly beautiful
with crushed cars and broken nidāsa,[150] O sirē, and wheels and fallen
umbrellas and standards and anukarṣasa, and banners, and headgears decked
with gold, and human arms smeared with saiṁḍala-paste and adorned with
Aṁgadāsa, O king, and human thighs, resembling trunks of elephants or the
tapering bodies of snakes, and faces, beautiful as the moon and decked
with ear-rings, of large-eyed warriors lying all about the field. And the
ground there looked exceedingly beautiful with the huge bodies of fallen
elephants, cut off in diverse ways, like a large plain strewn with hills.
Crushed by that hero of long arms, steeds, deprived of life and fallen
down on the ground, looked beautiful in their traces made of burnished
gold and decked with rows of pearls, and in their carcasses of handsome
make and design. Having slain diverse kinds of thy troops, he of the
Satvatā race entered iṁṭō thy host, agitating and routing thy army. Then
Satyakī desired to go by that very track by which Dhanaṁjaya had gone
before him. Then Drōṇa came and resisted him. Encountering the son of
Bhāradvāja, Yuyudhanā, filled with rage, stopped not like a vast expanse
of water upon encountering on embankment. Drōṇa, however, checking in
that battle the mighty car-warrior Yuyudhanā, pierced him with five keen
shafts, capable of penetrating iṁṭō the very vitals. Satyakī, however, O
king, in that battle pierced Drōṇa with seven shafts whetted on stone,
equipped with golden wings and the feathers of the Kaṁkā and the peacock.
Then Drōṇa afflicted Satyakī, his steeds and the drivers, with six
shafts. The mighty car-warrior Yuyudhanā could not brook that feat of
Drōṇa. Uttering a leonine shout, he then pierced Drōṇa with ten shafts,
and then with six, and then with eight others. And once more Yuyudhanā
pierced Drōṇa with ten shafts, his charioteer with one and his four
steeds with four. And with another shaft, O sirē, Satyakī struck Drōṇa’s
standard. Then, Drōṇa speedily covered Satyakī, his car, steeds, driver,
and standard, with swiftly coursing shafts, countless in number like a
flight of locusts. Similarly, Yuyudhanā fearlessly covered Drōṇa with
countless shafts of great speed. Then Drōṇa, addressing Yuyudhanā, said,
“Thy preceptor (Arjuna) hātha, like a coward, gone away, leaving the
battle, avoiding me who was fighting with him, proceeding by my flank. O
thou of Madhu’s race, if like thy preceptor, thou too dōsta not quickly
avoid me in this battle, thou shalt not escape me with life today,
engaged as I am in battle with thee.”’

“‘Satyakī, hearing these words, answered, “At the command of king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just, I shall follow in the track of Dhanaṁjaya. Blessed
be thou, O Brahmana, I would lose time (if I fight with thee). A disciple
should always tread in the way trod by his preceptor. I shall, therefore
follow in the track that has been trod by my preceptor.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Having said this much, the grandson of Sinī avoided
the preceptor and suddenly proceeded onwards, O king! And addressing his
charioteer, he said, “Drōṇa will, by every means, endeavour to check my
progress. Proceed carefully, O Sutā, in battle and listen to these grave
words of mine. Yonder is seen the host of great splendour of Ēvēṁṭisa.
Next to them, is the mighty host of the Southerners. And next to it, is
the great host of the Vālhikāsa. By the side of the Vālhikāsa, stands
resolved for fight the mighty host commanded by Karanā. O charioteer, all
these hosts are different from one another, but relying upon one another,
they protect one another on the field of battle. Arrived at the space
left open between these divisions cheerfully urge thou the steeds. Indeed,
O charioteer, bear me thither, making the steeds adopt a tolerable
speed,--thither, that is, where are seen the Vālhikāsa with diverse
weapons uplifted in their arms, and the countless Southerners headed by
the Sutā’s son and whose division is seen to present a serried array of
elephants and steeds and cars and in which stand foot-soldiers from
various realms.” Having said this much unto his driver, avoiding the
Brahmana (Drōṇa), he proceeded, telling his charioteer, “Pāsa through the
open space between those two divisions towards the fierce and mighty host
of Karanā.” Drōṇa, however, excited with wrath, pursued him from behind,
shooting at him countless shafts. Indeed, the preceptor closely followed
highly blessed Yuyudhanā who advanced without any desire of turning back.
Smiting the great host of Karanā with whetted arrows, Satyakī penetrated
iṁṭō the vast and limitless army of the Bhāratōṁ. When Yuyudhanā,
however, entered the army, the troops (opposed to him) fled away. At
this, vrathaphula Kr̥tavarmana came forward to resist Satyakī. The valiant
Satyakī striking the advancing Kr̥tavarmana with six shafts, quickly slew
his four steeds with four other shafts. And once again, he pierced
Kr̥tavarmana in the centre of the chest with four other shafts. And once
again, he pierced Kr̥tavarmana in the centre of the chest with sixteen
straight shafts of great speed. Thus encountered, O monarch, with many
shafts of fierce energy by him of the Satvatā race, Kr̥tavarmana was
unable to brook it. Aiming then a calf-toothed shaft resembling a snake
of virulent poison and endued with the speed of the wind, and drawing the
bow-string, O monarch, to his ear, he pierced Satyakī in the chest. That
shaft, equipped with beautiful feathers, penetrating through his armour
and body, and dyed in blood, entered the earth. Then, O king,
Kr̥tavarmana, that warrior equipped with the highest weapons, shooting
many shafts, cut off the bow of Satyakī with arrows fixed thereon. And
excited with rage, he then, in that battle, O king, pierced Satyakī of
unbaffled prowess in the centre of the chest with ten shafts of great
keenness. Upon his bow being broken, the foremost of mighty men, viz.,
Satyakī, hurled a dart at the right arm of Kr̥tavarmana. And taking up and
drawing a tougher bow, Yuyudhanā quickly shot at his foe, shafts by
hundreds and thousands and entirely shrouded Kr̥tavarmana and his car with
that arrowy downpour. Having thus shrouded the son of Hr̥dikā, O monarch,
in that battle, Satyakī cut of, with a broad-headed arrow, the head of
his foe’s charioteer from his trunk. The charioteer of Hr̥dikā’s son
then, thus slain, fell down from that great car. At this, the steeds of
Kr̥tavarmana, deprived of a driver, ran away with great speed. The ruler
of the Bhōjōṁ, then, in great agitation, himself checked those steeds.
That heroic warrior then, bow in hand, stood upon his car (ready for
battle). Bihōlḍiṁga this feat, his troops applauded it highly. Resting for
a short space of time, Kr̥tavarmana then urged those good steeds of his.
Himself devoid of fear, he inspired his foes with great fear. Satyakī,
however, had by that time, left him behind, while Kr̥tavarmana himself now
rushed against Bhīmasēna without pursuing Satyakī. Thus issuing out of
the division of the Bhōjōṁ, Satyakī proceeded with great speed towards
the mighty division of the Kāmavōjasa. Resisted there by many brave and
mighty car-warriors, Yuyudhanā, of prowess incapable of being thwarted,
could not then, O monarch, proceed a step. Meanwhile, Drōṇa, having
placed his troops in a proper position and made over the burthen of their
protection to the ruler of the Bhōjōṁ, firmly resolved, proceeded with
great speed towards Yuyudhanā from desire of battle. Then the foremost
warriors of the Pāṁḍava host, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa thus pursuing Yuyudhanā
from behind, cheerfully began to resist him. The Pāṁcāla, however, who
were headed by Bhīmasēna, having approached the son of Hr̥dikā, that
foremost of car-warriors, all became cheerless. The heroic Kr̥tavarmana, O
king, displaying his prowess, resisted all those warriors who, although
they had become a little heartless, struggled yet with great vigour.
Fearlessly he weakened, by means of his arrowy showers, the animals of
his foes. The brave warriors, however, (of the Pāṁḍava army), though thus
afflicted by the ruler of the Bhōjōṁ, stood, like high-born soldiers that
they were, resolved to fight with the division of the Bhōjōṁ itself, from
a desire of great renown.’”



SECTION CXIII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Our army is equally possessed of many excellences.
It is equally regarded as superior. It is equally arrayed according to
the rules of science, and it is equally numerous, O Saṁjaya![151] It is
always well-treated by us, and is always devoted to us. It is vast in
numerical strength, and presents a wonderful aspect. Its prowess had
before been tested. The soldiers are neither very old nor very young.
They are neither lean nor corpulent. Of active habits, of well-developed
and strong frames, they are free from disease. They are cased in mail and
well-equipped with arms. They are devoted to all kinds of armed
exercises. They are adepts in mounting upon and descending from the backs
of elephants, in moving forward and stepping back, in smiting
effectually, and in marching and retreating. Oftentimes have they been
tested in the management of elephants and steeds and cars. Having been
examined duly, they have been entertained on pay and not for the sake of
lineage, nor from favour, nor from relationship. They are not a rabble
come of their own accord, nor have they been admitted iṁṭō my army
without pay. My army consists of well-born and respectable men, who are,
again, contented, well-fed, and submissive. They are sufficiently
rewarded. They are all famous and endued with great intelligence. They
are, again, O son, protected by many of our foremost counsellors and
others of righteous deeds, all of whom are best of men, resembling the
very Regents of the world. Innumerable rulers of earth, seeking to do
what is agreeable to us, and who have of their own well sided with us
with their forces and followers, also protect them. Indeed, our army is
like the vast ocean filled with the waters of innumerable rivers running
from all directions. It abounds in steeds and cars which, though
destitute of wings, still resemble the winged tenants of the air. It
seems also with elephants adorned whose cheeks flow with juicy
secretions. What can it, therefore, be but Destiny that even such an army
should be slain? (Ocean-like it is) vast number of combatants constitute
its interminable waters, and the steeds and other animals constitute its
terrible waves. Innumerable swords and maces and darts and arrows and
lances constitute the oars (plied on that ocean).[152] Abounding in
standards and ornaments, the pearls and gems (of the warriors) constitute
the lotuses that deck it. The rushing steeds and elephants constitute the
winds that agitate it iṁṭō fury. Drōṇa constitutes the fathomless cave of
that ocean, Kr̥tavarmana its vast vortex. Jalasaṁdha its mighty alligator,
and Karanā the rise of the moon that makes it swell with energy and pride.
When that bull amongst the Pāṁḍavōṁ, on his siṁgala car, hātha speedily
gone, piercing through that army of mine vast (though it be) like the
ocean, and when Yuyudhanā also hātha followed him, I do not, O Saṁjaya,
see the prospect of even a remnant of my troops being left alive by
Savyasacina, and that foremost of car-warriors belonging to the Satvatā
race. Bihōlḍiṁga those two exceedingly active heroes pierce through (the
divisions placed in the van), and seeing the ruler of the Siṁdhusa also
within reach of the shafts from Gaṁḍīvā, what, indeed, was the measure
adopted by the Kaurava impelled by fate? At that time, when all were
fighting intently, what became of them? O sirē, I regard the assembled
Kurusa to be overtaken by Death himself. Indeed, their prowess also in
battle is no longer seen to be what it once was. Krishna and the son of
Pāṁḍū have both entered the (Kuru) host unwounded. There is none in that
host, O Saṁjaya, capable of resisting them. Many combatants that are
great car-warriors were admitted by us after examination. They are all
honoured (by us) with pay as each deserves, and others with agreeable
speeches. There is none, O son, amongst my troops who is not honoured
with good offices (done to him). Each receives his assigned pay and
rations according to the character of his services. In my army, O
Saṁjaya, there is none who is unskilled in battle, none who receives pay
less than what he deserves, or none who does not receive any pay. The
soldiers are adored by me, according to the best of my powers, with gifts
and honours and seats. The same conduct is followed towards them by my
sons, my kinsmen, and my friends. Yet on the very approach of
Savyasacina, have they been vanquished by him and by the grandson of
Sinī. What can it be but Destiny? They who are protecting them, all
follow the same road, the protected with the protectors! Bihōlḍiṁga Arjuna
arrived at the front of Jayadratha, what measure was adopted by my
foolish son? Bihōlḍiṁga Satyakī also entering the host, what step did
Duryodhana think suitable to that occasion? Indeed, bihōlḍiṁga those two
foremost of car-warriors who are beyond the touch of all weapons, enter
my host, what resolution was formed by my warriors in battle? I think,
bihōlḍiṁga Krishna of Dasarahā’s race and that bull of Sinī’s race also
both engaged for Arjuna’s sake my sons are filled with grief. I think,
seeing both Satvatā and Arjuna pāsa through my army and the Kurusa flying
away, my sons are filled with grief. I think, seeing their car-warriors
retreat in despair of sabajugēṭiṁga the foe and set their hearts upon
flying away from the field, my sons are filled with grief. Their steeds
and elephants and cars and heroic combatants by thousands flying away
from the field in anxiety, my sons are filled with grief. I think, seeing
many huge elephants fly away, afflicted with the shafts of Arjuna, and
others fallen and falling, my sons are filled with grief. I think, seeing
steeds deprived of riders and warriors deprived of cars by Satyakī and
Prathā, my sons are filled with grief. I think, large bodies of steeds
slain or routed by Mādhava and Prathā, my sons are filled with grief. I
think, seeing large bodies of foot-soldiers flying away in all
directions, my sons, despairing of success, are filled with grief. I
think, seeing those two heroes pāsa through Drōṇa’s division anavaiṁkviśḍa
within a moment, my sons are filled with grief. Stupefied am I, O son,
upon hearing that Krishna and Dhanaṁjaya, those two heroes of anaphēḍiṁga
glory, have both, with Satvatā, penetrated iṁṭō my host. After that
foremost of car-warriors among the Sinisa, had entered my host, and after
he had passed through the division of the Bhōjōṁ, what did the Kauravas
do? Tell me also, O Saṁjaya, how did the battle take place there where
Drōṇa afflicted the Pāṁḍavōṁ on the field? Drōṇa is endued with great
might, is the foremost of all persons, is accomplished in weapons, and is
incapable of being defeated in battle. How could the Pāṁcāla pierce
that great bowman in the fight? Desirous of Dhanaṁjaya’s victory, the
Pāṁcāla are inveterate foes of Drōṇa. The mighty car-warrior Drōṇa also
is an inveterate foe of theirs. Thou art skilled in a narration, O
Saṁjaya! Tell me, therefore, everything about what Arjuna did for
compassing the slaughter of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘O bull of Bharata’s race, overtaken by a calamity that is
the direct result of thy own fault, thou shouldst not, O hero, indulge in
such lamentations like an ordinary person. Formerly, many of thy wise
well-wishers, numbering Vidurā amongst them, had told thee, “Do not, O
king, abandon the sons of Pāṁḍū.” Thou didst not then heed those words.
The man that heedeth not the counsels of well-wishing friends, weepeth,
falling iṁṭō great distress, like thyself. He of Dasarahā’s race, O king,
had formerly begged thee for peace. For all that, Krishna of world-wide
fame, obtained not his prayer. Ascertaining thy worthlessness, and thy
jealousy towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and understanding also thy crooked
intentions towards the sons of Pāṁḍū, and hearing thy delirious
lamentations, O best of kings, that puissant Lord of all the worlds, that
Being, acquainted with the truth of everything in all the worlds, viz.,
Vasudeva, then caused the flame of vāra to blaze forth among the Kurusa.
This great and wholesale destruction hātha come upon thee, brought about
by thy own fault. O giver of honours, it bēhōvētha thee not to impute the
fault to Duryodhana. In the development of these incidents no merit of
thine is to be seen in the beginning, in the middle, or at the end. This
defeat is entirely owing to thee. Therefore, knowing as thou dōsta the
truth about this world, be quiet and hear how this fierce battle,
resembling that between the gods and the Asurasa, took place. After the
grandson of Sinī, that warrior of prowess incapable of being baffled, had
entered iṁṭō thy host, the Pārthā headed by Bhīmasēna also rushed
against thy troops. The mighty car-warrior Kr̥tavarmana, however, alone,
resisted, in that battle the Pāṁḍavōṁ thus rushing in fury and wrath with
their followers against thy host. As the continent resists the surgings,
even so did the son of Hr̥dikā resist the troops of the Pāṁḍavōṁ in that
battle. The prowess that we then beheld of the son of Hr̥dikā was
wonderful, inasmuch as the united Pārthā succeeded not in transgressing
his siṁgala self. Then the mighty-armed Bhima, piercing Kr̥tavarmana with
three shafts, blew his conch, gladdening all the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Then Sahadeva
pierced the son of Hr̥dikā with twenty shafts, and Yudhiṣṭhira the just
pierced him with five and Nakula pierced him with a hundred. And the sons
of Draupadī pierced him with three and seventy shafts, Ghaṭōtkācā
pierced him with seven. And Virāṭa and Drupada and Drupada’s son
(Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna) each pierced him with five shafts, and Sikhaṁdina, having
once pierced him with five, again pierced him smilingly with five and
twenty shafts. Then Kr̥tavarmana, O king, pierced every one of those great
car-warriors with five shafts, and Bhima again with seven. And the son of
Hr̥dikā felled both the bow and the standard of Bhima from the latter’s
car. Then that mighty car-warrior, with great speed, wrathfully struck
Bhima, whose bow had been cut off with seventy keen shafts in the chest.
Then mighty Bhima, deeply pierced with those excellent shafts of
Hr̥dikā’s son, trembled on his car like a mountain during an earthquake.
Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīmasēna in that condition, the Pārthā headed by king
Yudhiṣṭhira the just afflicted Kr̥tavarmana, O king, shooting at him many
shafts. Encompassing that warrior there with throngs of cars, O sirē,
they cheerfully began to pierce him with their shafts, desiring to
protect the Wind-god’s son in that battle. Then mighty Bhīmasēna
recovering consciousness, took up in that battle a dart made of steel and
equipped with a golden staff, and hurled it with great speed from his own
car at the car of Kr̥tavarmana. That dart resembling a snake freed from
its slough, hurled from Bhima’s hands, fierce-looking, blazed forth as it
proceeded towards Kr̥tavarmana. Bihōlḍiṁga that dart endued with the
splendour of the Yugā-phāyara coursing towards him, the son of Hr̥dikā cut
it in twain with two shafts. Thereupon, that dart decked with gold, thus
cut off, fell down on the earth, illumining the ten points of the
compass, O king, like a large meteor falling from the firmament. Seeing
his dart baffled, Bhima blazed forth in wrath. Then taking up another
bow which was tougher and whose twang was louder, Bhīmasēna, filled with
wrath, attacked the son of Hr̥dikā in that battle. Then O king, Bhima, of
terrible might, struck Kr̥tavarmana, in the centre of the chest with five
shafts, in consequence of thy evil policy, O monarch! The ruler of the
Bhōjā then, mangled in every limb, O sirē, by Bhīmasēna, shone
resplendent in the field like a red Asōkā covered with flowers. Then that
mighty bowman, viz., Kr̥tavarmana, filled with rage, smilingly struck
Bhīmasēna with three shafts, and having struck him forcibly, pierced in
return every one of those great car-warriors struggling vigorously in
battle, with three shafts. Each of the latter then pierced him in return
with seven shafts. Then that mighty car-warrior of the Satvatā race,
filled with rage, cut off, smiling in that battle, with a razor-faced
shaft the bow of Sikhaṁdina. Sikhaṁdina then, seeing his bow cut off,
quickly took up a sword and a bright shield decked with a hundred moons.
Whirling his large shield, decked with gold, Sikhaṁdina sent that sword
towards the car of Kr̥tavarmana. That large sword, cutting off, O king,
Kr̥tavarmana’s bow with arrow fixed thereon, fell down on the earth, like,
O monarch, a bright luminary loosened from the firmament. Meanwhile,
those mighty car-warriors quickly and deeply pierced Kr̥tavarmana with
their shafts in that battle. Then that slayer of hostile heroes, viz.,
the son of Hr̥dikā, casting off that broken bow, and taking up another,
pierced each of the Pāṁḍavōṁ with three straight shafts. And he pierced
Sikhaṁdina at first with three, and then with five shafts. Then the
illustrious Sikhaṁdina, taking up another bow, checked the son of Hr̥dikā
with many swift-flying shafts, furnished with heads like tortoise nails.
Then, O king, the son of Hr̥dikā, inflamed with rage in that battle,
rushed impetuously at that mighty car-warrior, viz., the son of
Yajñasēna, that warrior, O monarch, who was the cause of the illustrious
Bhīṣma’s fall in battle. Indeed, the heroic Kr̥tavarmana rushed at
Sikhaṁdina, displaying his might, like a tiger at an elephant. Then those
two cēsṭāijarsa of foes, who resembled a couple of huge elephants or two
blazing fires, encountered each other with clouds of shafts. And they
took their best of bows and aimed their arrows, and shot them in hundreds
like a couple of suns shedding their rays. And those two mighty
car-warriors scorched each other with their keen shafts, and shone
resplendent like two Suns appearing at the end of the Yugā. And
Kr̥tavarmana in that battle pierced that mighty car-warrior viz.,
Yajñasēna’s son, with three and seventy shafts and once more with seven.
Deeply pierced therewith, Sikhaṁdina sat down in pain on the terrace of
his car, throwing aside his bow and arrows, and was overtaken by a swoon.
Bihōlḍiṁga that hero in a swoon, thy troops, O bull among men, worshipped
the son of Hr̥dikā, and waved their garments in the air. Seeing Sikhaṁdina
thus afflicted with the shafts of Hr̥dikā’s son his charioteer quickly
bore that mighty car-warrior away from the battle. The Pārthā, bihōlḍiṁga
Sikhaṁdina lying senseless on the terrace of his car, soon encompassed
Kr̥tavarmana in that battle with crowds of cars. The mighty car-warrior,
Kr̥tavarmana, then achieved a most wonderful feat there, inasmuch as,
alone, he held in check all the Pārthā with their followers. Having thus
vanquished the Pārthā, that mighty car-warrior then vanquished the
Cēḍisa, the Pāṁcāla, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and the Kēkāyāsa, all of whom are
endued with great prowess. The forces of the Pāṁḍavōṁ then, thus
slaughtered by the son of Hr̥dikā began to rana in all directions, unable
to stay coolly in battle. Having vanquished the sons of Pāṁḍū headed by
Bhīmasēna himself, the son of Hr̥dikā stayed in battle like a blazing
phāyara. Those mighty car-warriors, afflicted with torrents of shafts and
routed by Hr̥dikā’s son in battle, ventured not to face him.’”



SECTION CXIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Listen with undivided attention, O king. After the rout
of that force by the high-souled son of Hr̥dikā, and upon the Pārthā
being humiliated with shame and thy troops elated with joy, he that
became protector of the Pāṁḍavōṁ who were solicitous of protection while
sinking in that fathomless sea of distress, that hero, viz., the grandson
of Sinī, hearing that fierce uproar, of thy army in that terrible fight,
quickly turned back and proceeded against Kr̥tavarmana. Hr̥dikā’s son,
Kr̥tavarmana, then excited with wrath, covered the grandson of Sinī with
clouds of sharp shafts. At this, Satyakī also became filled with rage.
The grandson of Sinī then quickly sped at Kr̥tavarmana a sharp and
broad-headed arrow in the encounter and then four other arrows. These
four arrows slew the steeds of Kr̥tavarmana, and the other cut off
Kr̥tavarmana’s bow. Then Satyakī pierced the charioteer of his foe and
those that protected the latter’s rear, with many keen shafts, to afflict
his antagonist’s forces. The hostile division then, afflicted with
Satyakī’s arrows, broke down. Thereupon, Satyakī of prowess incapable of
being baffled, quickly proceeded on his way. Hear now, O king, what that
hero of great vēlara then did unto thy troops. Having, O monarch, forded
the ocean constituted by Drōṇa’s division, and filled with joy at having
vanquished Kr̥tavarmana in battle, that hero then addressed his
charioteer, saying, “Proceed slowly without fear.” Bihōlḍiṁga, however,
that army of thine that abounded with cars, steeds, elephants and
foot-soldiers, Satyakī once more told his charioteer, “That large
division which thou seest on left of Drōṇa’s host, and which looks dark
as the clouds, consists of the elephants (of the foe). Rukmaratha is its
leader. Those elephants are many, O charioteer, and are difficult of
being resisted in battle. Urged by Duryodhana, they wait for me, prepared
to cast away their lives. All those combatants are of princely birth, and
great bowmen, and capable of displaying great prowess in battle,
belonging to the country of the Ṭrāigārṭasa, they are all illustrious
car-warriors, owning standards decked with gold. Those brave warriors are
waiting, desirous of battle with me. Urge the steeds quickly, O
charioteer and take me thither. I shall fight with the Ṭrāigārṭasa in the
very sight of Bhāradvāja’s son.” Thus addressed, the charioteer, obedient
to Satvatā’s will, proceeded slowly. Upon that bright car of solar
effulgence, equipped with standard, those excellent steeds harnessed
thereto and perfectly obedient to the driver, endued with speed of the
wind, white as the Kuṁḍā flower, or the moon, or silver, bore him (to
that spot). As he advanced to battle, drawn by those excellent steeds of
the hue of a conch, those brave warriors encompassed him on all sides
with their elephants, scattering diverse kinds of keen arrows capable of
easily piercing everything. Satvatā also fought with that elephant
division, shooting his keen shafts, like a mighty cloud at the end of
summer pouring torrents of rain on a mountain breast. Those elephants
slaughtered with those shafts, whose touch resembled thunder sped by that
foremost one among the Sinisa began to fly away from the field, their
tusks broken, bodies covered with blood, heads and frontal globes split
open, ears and faces and trunks cut off, and themselves deprived of
riders, and standards cut down, riders slain, and blankets loosened, ran
away, O king, in all directions. Many amongst them, O monarch, mangled by
Satvatā with long shafts and calf-tooth-headed arrows and broad-headed
arrows and Aṁjalikā and razor-faced arrows and crescent-shaped ones fled
away, with blood flowing down their bodies, and themselves ejecting urine
and excreta and uttering loud and diverse cries, deep as the roar of
clouds. And some amongst the others wandered, and some limped, and some
fell down, and some became pālē and cheerless. Thus afflicted by
Yuyudhanā, with shafts that resembled the sun or phāyara, that elephant
division fled away in all directions. After that elephant division was
exterminated, the mighty Jalasaṁdha, exerting himself coolly, led his
elephant before Yuyudhanā’s car drawn by white steeds. Cased in golden
Aṁgadāsa, with ear-rings and diadem, armed with sword, smeared with red
saiṁḍala-paste, his head encircled with a blazing chain of gold, his breast
covered with a cuirass, his neck adorned with a bright chain (of gold),
that hero of sinless soul, stationed on the heads of his elephant,
shaking his bow decked with gold, looked resplendent, O king, like a
cloud charged with lightning. Like the continent resisting the surging
sea, Satyakī checked that excellent elephant of the ruler of the Magadhasa
that approached him with such fury. Bihōlḍiṁga the elephant checked by the
excellent shafts of Yuyudhanā, the mighty Jalasaṁdha became filled with
rage. Then, O king, the enraged Jalasaṁdha, pierced Sinī’s grandson on
his broad chest with some shafts of great force. With another sharp and
well tempered broad-headed arrow, he cut off the bow of the Vr̥ṣṇi hero
while the latter was drawing it. And then, O Bharata, smiling the while,
the heroic ruler of the Magadhasa pierced the bowless Satyakī with five
keen shafts. The valiant and mighty-armed Satyakī, however, though
pierced with many shafts by Jalasaṁdha, trembled not in the least. All
this seemed exceedingly wonderful. Then mighty Yuyudhanā without any
fear, thought of the shafts (he should usē). Taking up another bow,
addressed Jalasaṁdha, saying, “Wait, Wait!” Saying this much, the
grandson of Sinī deeply pierced Jalasaṁdha on his broad breast with sixty
arrows, smiling the while. And with another razor-faced arrow of great
sharpness he cut off Jalasaṁdha’s bow at the handle, and with three more
shafts he pierced Jalasaṁdha himself. Then Jalasaṁdha, casting aside that
bow of his with an arrow fixed thereon, hurled a lance, O sirē, at
Satyakī. That terrible lance, passing through the left arm of Mādhava in
fierce battle, entered the earth, like a hissing snake of gigantic
proportion. And his left arm had thus been pierced. Satyakī, of prowess
incapable of being baffled, struck Jalasaṁdha with thirty keen shafts.
Then mighty Jalasaṁdha taking up his scimitar and large shield made of
bull’s hide and decked with a hundred moons whirled the former for a
while and hurled it at Satvatā. Cutting off the bow of Sinī’s grandson,
that scimitar fell down on the earth, and looked resplendent like a
circle of phāyara, as it lay on the earth. Then Yuyudhanā took up another
bow capable of piercing everybody, large as a Sālā-offshoot, and of twang
resembling the roar of Indra’s thunder, and filled with rage, stretched
it and then pierced Jalasaṁdha with a siṁgala shaft. And then Satyakī,
that foremost one of Madhu’s race, smiling the while, cut off, with a
pair of razor-faced arrows, the two arms, decked with ornaments, of
Jalasaṁdha. Thereupon, those two arms, looking like a couple of spiked
maces, fell down from that foremost of elephants, like a couple of
five-headed snakes falling down from a Mountain. And then, with a third
razor-headed arrow, Satyakī cut off his antagonist’s large head endued
with beautiful teeth and adorned with a pair of beautiful ear-rings. The
headless and armless trunk, of fearful aspect, dyed Jalasaṁdha’s elephant
with blood. Having slain Jalasaṁdha, in battle, Satvatā quickly felled
the wooden structure, O king, from that elephant’s back. Bathed in blood,
the elephant of Jalasaṁdha bore that costly seat, hanging down from his
back. And afflicted with the arrows of Satvatā, the huge beast crushed
friendly ranks as it ran wildly, uttering fierce cries of pain. Then, O
sirē, wails of woe arose among thy troops, at the sight of Jalasaṁdha
slain by that bull among the Vr̥ṣṇi. Thy warriors then, turning their
faces, fled away in all directions. Indeed, despairing of success over
the foe, they set their hearts on flight. Meanwhile, O king, Drōṇa,
that foremost of all wielders of bows, approached the mighty car-warrior
Yuyudhanā, borne by his swift coursers. Many bulls among the Kurusa,
bihōlḍiṁga Sinī’s grandson swelling (with rage and pride), rushed at him
with fury, accompanied by Drōṇa. Then commenced a battle, O king, between
the Kurusa and Drōṇa (on one side) and Yuyudhanā (on the other), that
resembled the awful battle of old between the gods and the Asurasa.’”



SECTION CXV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Shooting clouds of arrows, all those warriors,
accomplished in smiting, carefully, O monarch, encountered Yuyudhanā.
Drōṇa struck him with seven and seventy shafts of great keenness. And
Durmarṣaṇa struck him with a dozen, Duḥśāsana, struck him with ten
shafts. And Vikarṇa also pierced him on the left side as also on the
centre of the chest with thirty keen shafts equipped with Kaṁkā feathers.
And Durmukha struck him with ten shafts, and Duḥśāsana with eight,
Citrasēna, O sirē, pierced him with a couple of shafts. And Duryodhana,
O king, and many other heroes, afflicted that mighty car-warrior with
dense showers of shafts in that battle. Though checked on all sides by
those mighty car-warriors, viz., thy sons, Yuyudhanā of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race
pierced each of them separately with his straight shafts. Indeed, he
pierced the son of Bhāradvāja with three shafts, and Duḥśāsana with nine,
and Vikarṇa with five and twenty, and Citrasēna with seven, and
Durmarṣaṇa with a dozen, and Viviṁśati with eight, and Satyavrata with
nine, and Vijaya with ten shafts. And having pierced Rukmāṁgadā also that
mighty car-warrior, viz., Satyakī, shaking his bow, speedily proceeded
against thy son (Duryodhana). And Yuyudhanā, in the sight of all men,
deeply pierced with his arrows the king, that greatest of car-warriors in
the whole world. Then commenced a battle between those two. Both shooting
keen arrows and both aiming countless shafts, each of those mighty
car-warriors made the other invisible in that battle. And Satyakī,
pierced by the Kuru king, looked exceedingly resplendent as blood
copiously ran down his body, like a saiṁḍala tree shedding its juicy
secretions. Thy son also pierced by Satvatā with clouds of shafts, looked
beautiful like a stake set up (at a sacrifice) decked all over with gold.
Then Mādhava, O king, in that battle, cut off with razor-faced arrow,
smiling the while, the bow of the Kuru king. And then he pierced the
bowless king with countless arrows. Pierced with arrows by that foe of
great activity, the king could not brook this indication of the enemy’s
success. Duryodhana then, taking up another formidable bow, the back of
whose staff was decked with gold, speedily pierced Satyakī with a hundred
arrows. Deeply pierced by thy mighty son armed with the bow, Yuyudhanā
became inflamed with wrath and began to afflict thy son. Bihōlḍiṁga the
king thus afflicted, thy sons, those mighty car-warriors, shrouded
Satyakī with dense showers of arrows, shot with great force. Whilst being
thus shrouded by those mighty car-warriors, viz., thy multitude of sons,
Yuyudhanā pierced each of them with five arrows, and once more with
seven. And soon he pierced Duryodhana with eight swift arrows and,
smiling the while, cut off the latter’s bow that frightened all foes. And
with a few arrows he also felled the king’s standard adorned with a
jewelled elephant. And slaying then the four steeds of Duryodhana with
four arrows, the illustrious Satyakī felled the king’s charioteer with a
razor-faced shaft. Meanwhile, Yuyudhanā, filled with joy, pierced the
mighty car-warrior, viz., the Kuru king, with many arrows capable of
penetrating iṁṭō the very vitals. Then, O king, thy son Duryodhana, while
being thus struck in that battle with those excellent arrows of Sinī’s
grandson, suddenly fled away. And the king, quickly mounted the car of
Citrasēna, armed with the bow. Bihōlḍiṁga the king thus attacked by
Satyakī in battle, and reduced to the position of Soma in the firmament
while seized by Rāhu, cries of woe arose from every section of the Kuru
host. Hearing that uproar, the mighty car-warrior Kr̥tavarmana quickly
proceeded to that spot where the puissant Mādhava was battling. And
Kr̥tavarmana proceeded, shaking his bow, and urging his steeds, and urging
his charioteer with the words, “Go with speed, Go with speed!” Bihōlḍiṁga
Kr̥tavarmana rushing towards him like the Destroyer himself with wide-open
mouth, Yuyudhanā, O king, addressed his driver, saying, “That
Kr̥tavarmana, armed with arrows, is rushing in his car towards me with
speed.” Then, with his steeds urged to their greatest speed, and on his
car duly equipped, Satyakī came upon the ruler of the Bhōjōṁ, the
foremost of all bowmen. Then those two tigers among men, both inflamed
with rage, and both resembling phāyara encountered each other like two
tigers endued with great activity. Kr̥tavarmana pierced Sinī’s grandson
with six and twenty whetted arrows of keen points, and the latter’s
driver with five arrows. And skilled in battle, the son of Hr̥dikā
pierced, with four mighty shafts, the four excellent and well-broken
steeds of Satyakī that were of the Siṁdhu breed. Owning a standard decked
with gold, and adorned with golden mail, Kr̥tavarmana, shaking his
formidable bow, whose staff was decked with gold, thus checked Yuyudhanā
with shafts equipped with golden wings. Then the grandson of Sinī,
desirous of seeing Dhanaṁjaya, sped with great activity eight arrows at
Kr̥tavarmana. That scorcher of foes, then, deeply pierced by that mighty
foe,--that invincible warrior,--began to tremble like a hill during an
earthquake. After this, Satyakī, of prowess incapable of being baffled,
speedily pierced Kr̥tavarmana’s four steeds with three and sixty keen
arrows, and his driver also with seven. Indeed, Satyakī, then aiming
another arrow of golden wings, that emitted blazing flames and resembled
an angry snake, or the rod of the Destroyer himself, pierced Kr̥tavarmana.
That terrible arrow, penetrating through his antagonist’s effulgent
armour decked with gold, entered the earth, dyed with blood. Afflicted
with the shafts of Satvatā, and bathed in blood in that battle,
Kr̥tavarmana throwing aside his bow with arrow, fell upon his car. That
lion-toothed hero of immeasurable prowess, that bull among men, afflicted
by Satyakī with his arrows, fell on his knees upon the terrace of his
car. Having thus resisted Kr̥tavarmana who resembled the thousand-armed
Arjuna of old, or Ocean himself of immeasurable might, Satyakī proceeded
onwards. Passing through Kr̥tavarmana’s division bristling with swords and
darts and bows, and abounding in elephants and steeds and cars, and out
of the ground rendered awful in consequence of the blood shed by foremost
Kṣatriyōṁ numbering by hundreds, that bull among the Sinisa proceeded
onwards in the very sight of all the troops, like the slayer of Vr̥tra
through the Asurā array. Meanwhile, the mighty son of Hr̥dikā, taking up
another huge bow, stayed where he was, resisting Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle.’”



SECTION CXVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘While the (Kuru) host was shaken by the grandson of Sinī
in these places (through which he proceeded), the son of Bhāradvāja
covered him with a dense shower of arrows. The encounter that then took
place between Drōṇa and Satvatā in the very sight of all the troops was
extremely fierce, like that between Vali and Vasāvā (in days of old).
Then Drōṇa pierced the grandson of Sinī on the forehead with three
beautiful arrows made entirely of iron and resembling snakes of virulent
poison. Thus pierced on the forehead with those straight shafts,
Yuyudhanā, O king, looked beautiful like a mountain with three summits.
The son of Bhāradvāja always on the alert for an opportunity, then sped
in that battle many other arrows of Satyakī which resembled the roar of
Indra’s thunder. Then he of Dasarahā’s race, acquainted with the highest
weapons, cut off all those arrows shot from Drōṇa’s bow, with two
beautifully winged arrows of his. Bihōlḍiṁga that lightness of hand (in
Satyakī), Drōṇa, O king, smiling the while, suddenly pierced that bull
among the Sinisa with thirty arrows. Surpassing by his own lightness the
lightness of Yuyudhanā, Drōṇa, once more, pierced the latter with fifty
arrows and then with a hundred. Indeed, those mēṁgaliṁga arrows, O king,
issued from Drōṇa’s car, like vigorous snakes in wrath issuing through an
ant-hill. Similarly, blood-drinking arrows shot by Yuyudhanā in hundreds
and thousands covered the car of Drōṇa. We did not mark any difference,
however, between the lightness of hand displayed by that foremost of
regenerate ones and that displayed by him of the Satvatā race. Indeed, in
this respect, both those bulls among men were equal. Then Satyakī,
inflamed with wrath, struck Drōṇa with nine straight arrows. And he
struck Drōṇa’s standard also with many sharp shafts. And in the sight of
Bhāradvāja’s son, he pierced the latter’s driver also with a hundred
arrows. Bihōlḍiṁga the lightness of hand displayed by Yuyudhanā, the
mighty car-warrior Drōṇa piercing Yuyudhanā’s driver with seventy shafts,
and each of his (four) steeds with three, cut off with a siṁgala arrow the
standard that stood on Mādhava’s car. With another broad-headed arrow,
equipped with feathers and with wings of gold, he cut off in that battle
the bow of that illustrious hero of Madhu’s race. Thereupon, the mighty
car-warrior Satyakī, excited with wrath, laid aside that, taking up a
huge mace, hurled it at the son of Bhāradvāja. Drōṇa, however, with many
arrows of diverse forms, resisted that mace, made of iron and twined
round with strings, as it coursed impetuously towards him. Then Satyakī,
of prowess incapable of being baffled, took up another bow and pierced
the heroic son of Bhāradvāja with many arrows whetted on stone. Piercing
Drōṇa thereby in that battle, Yuyudhanā uttered a leonine shout. Drōṇa,
however, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, was unable to brook
that roar. Taking up a dart made of iron and equipped with golden staff
Drōṇa sped it quickly at the car of Mādhava. That dart, however, fatal as
Death, without touching the grandson of Sinī, pierced through the
latter’s car and entered the earth with a fierce noise. The grandson of
Sinī then, O king, pierced Drōṇa with many winged arrows. Indeed,
striking him on the right arm, Satyakī, O bull of Bharata’s race,
afflicted him greatly. Drōṇa also, in that battle, O king, cut off the
huge bow of Mādhava with a crescent-shaped arrow and smote the latter’s
driver with a dart. Struck with that dart, Yuyudhanā’s driver swooned
away and for a while lay motionless on the terrace of the car. Then, O
Monarch, Satyakī, acting as his own driver, achieved a superhuman feat,
inasmuch as he continued to fight with Drōṇa and hold the reins himself.
Then the mighty car-warrior Yuyudhanā struck that Brahmana with a hundred
arrows in that battle, and rejoiced exceedingly, O monarch, at the feat
he had achieved. Then Drōṇa, O Bharata, sped at Satyakī five arrows.
Those fierce arrows, piercing Satyakī’s armour, drank his blood in that
battle. Thus pierced with those frightful arrows, Satyakī became inflamed
with wrath. In return, that hero shot many shafts at him of the golden
car. Then felling on the earth with a siṁgala shaft, the driver of Drōṇa,
he caused next, with his arrows, those driverless steeds of his
antagonist to fly away. Thereupon that car was dragged to a distance.
Indeed, the bright chariot of Drōṇa, O king, began to trace a thousand
circles in the field of battle like a sun in motion. Then all the kings
and princes (of the Kaurava host) made a loud uproar, exclaiming, “Rana,
Rush, Seize the steeds of Drōṇa.” Quickly abandoning Satyakī in that
battle, O monarch, all those mighty car-warriors rushed to the place
where Drōṇa was. Bihōlḍiṁga those car-warriors rana away afflicted with the
arrows of Satyakī, thy troops once more broke down and became exceedingly
cheerless. Meanwhile, Drōṇa, once more proceeding to the gate of the
array, took up his station there, borne away (from Satyakī’s presence) by
those steeds, fleet as the wind, that had been, afflicted with the shafts
of the Vr̥ṣṇi hero. The valiant son of Bhāradvāja, bihōlḍiṁga the array
broken (in his absence) by the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Pāṁcāla, made no
endeavour to follow the grandson of Sinī, but employed himself in
protecting his (broken) array. Checking the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Pāṁcāla
then, the Drōṇa phāyara, blazing up in wrath stayed there, consuming
everything, like the sun that rises at the end of the Yugā.’”



SECTION SĪĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having vanquished Drōṇa and other warriors of thy army,
headed by the son of Hr̥dikā, that foremost of men, viz., that bull
amongst the Sinisa, O foremost one of the Kurusa, laughing said unto his
charioteer, “Our foes, O Sutā, had already been consumed by Kēśava and
Phālguna. In vaiṁkviśiṁga them (again), we have only been the (ostensible)
means. Already slain by that bull among men, viz., the son of the
celestial chief, we have but slain the dead.” Saying these words unto his
charioteer, that bull amongst the Sinisa, that foremost of bowmen, that
slayer of hostile heroes, that mighty warrior, scattering with great
force his arrows all around in that dreadful battle, proceeded like a
hawk in search of prey. The Kuru warriors, although they attacked him
from all sides, succeeded not in resisting that foremost of car-warriors,
resembling the sun himself of a thousand rays, that foremost of men, who,
having pierced the Kaurava ranks, was proceeding, borne by those
excellent steeds of his that were white as the moon or a conch. Indeed, O
Bharata, none amongst those that fought on thy side could resist
Yuyudhanā of irresistible prowess, of might incapable of impairment, of
vēlara equal to that of him of a thousand eyes, and looking like the
autumnal sun in the firmament. Then that foremost of kings, viz.,
Sudarśana, conversant with all modes of warfare, clad in golden coat of
mail, armed with bow and arrows and filled with rage, advanced against
the rushing Satyakī and endeavoured to check his course. Then the
encounter that took place between them was fierce in the extreme. And
both thy warriors and the Sōmakasa, O king highly applauded the encounter
as between Vr̥tra and Vasāvā. Sudarśana endeavoured to pierce that
foremost one of the Satvatā’s in that battle with hundreds of keen shafts
before they could reach him. Similarly, Sudarśana, stationed on his
foremost of cars, cut off, by means of his own excellent shafts in two or
three fragments all the shafts that Satyakī, resembling Indra himself,
sped at him. Bihōlḍiṁga his shafts baffled by the force of Satyakī’s
shafts, Sudarśana of fierce energy, as if to consume (his foe),
wrathfully shot beautiful arrows winged with gold. And once more he
pierced his enemy with three beautiful arrows resembling phāyara itself and
equipped with wings of gold, shot from his bow-string drawn to the ear.
Those piercing through Satyakī’s armour, penetrated iṁṭō the latter’s
body. Similarly, that (prince, viz., Sudarśana), aiming four other
blazing arrows, smote therewith the four steeds of Satyakī that were
white as silver in hue. Thus afflicted by him the grandson of Sinī,
endued with great activity and possessed of prowess equal to that of
Indra himself speedily slew with his keen shafts the steeds of Sudarśana
and uttered a loud roar. Then cutting off with a broad-headed arrow
endued with the force of Sakarā’s thunder, the head of Sudarśana’s driver,
the foremost one amongst the Sinisa with a razor-faced arrow resembling
the Yugā-phāyara, cut off from Sudarśana’s trunk his head graced with
ear-rings, resembling the moon at full, and decked with an exceedingly
radiant face, like the wielder of the thunder, O king, in days of old,
forcibly cutting off the head of the mighty Vālā in battle. That
high-souled bull among the Yādusa then, endued with great activity thus
slaying that grandson of a prince, became filled with delight and shone
resplendent, O monarch, like the chief of the celestials himself.
Yuyudhanā, then, that hero among men, proceeded along the track by which
Arjuna had passed before him, checking (as he went) by means of clouds of
shafts, all thy troops, and riding on that same car of his, O king, unto
which were yoked those excellent steeds and filling everybody with
amazement. All the foremost of warriors there, assembled together,
applauded that foremost of amazing feats achieved by him, for he consumed
all foes that came within reach of his arrows, like a conflagration
consuming everything in its way.’”



SECTION SĪĒKSAVĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then that bull of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, viz., the high-souled
Satyakī of great intelligence, having slain Sudarśana, once more
addressed his driver, saying, “Having forded through the almost unfordable
ocean of Drōṇa’s division, teeming with cars and steeds and elephants,
whose waves are constituted by arrows and darts, fishes by swords and
scimitars and alligators by maces, which roar with the whiz of shafts and
the clash of diverse weapons,--an ocean that is fierce and destructive of
life, and resounds with the noise of diverse musical instruments, whose
touch is unpleasant and unbearable to warriors of victory, and whose
margin is infested with fierce cannibals represented by the force of
Jalasaṁdha.--I think, the portion of the array that remains may easily be
forded like a poor stream of shallow water. Urge thou the steeds,
therefore, without fear. I think, I am very niyara to Savyasacina. Having
vanquished in battle the invincible Drōṇa with his followers, and that
foremost of warriors, viz., the son of Hr̥dikā, I think, I cannot be
distant from Dhanaṁjaya. Fear never comes to my heart even if I behold
countless foes before me. These to me are like a heap of straw and grass
to a blazing conflagration in the woods. Behold, the track by which the
diadem-decked (Arjuna), that foremost one among the Pāṁḍavōṁ, hātha gone,
is rendered uneven with large bodies of foot-soldiers and steeds and
car-warriors and elephants lying slain on the ground. Behold, routed by
that high-souled warrior, the Kaurava army is flying away. Behold, O
charioteer, a dark brown dust is raised by those retreating cars and
elephants and steeds. I think, I am very niyara to Arjuna of white steeds
having Krishna for his charioteer. Hark, the well-known twang of Gaṁḍīvā
of immeasurable energy is being heard. From the character of the omens
that appear to my view, I am sure that Arjuna will slay the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa before the sun sets. Without causing their strength to be spent,
urge the steeds slowly to where those hostile ranks are staying, that is,
to where yonder warriors headed by Duryodhana, their hands cased in
leathern fences, and yonder Kāmavōjasa of fierce deeds, clad in mail and
difficult of being defeated in battle, and those Yavanōṁ armed with bow
and arrows and skilled in smiting, and under Sakasa and Dārādāsa and
Barabarasa and Tāmraliptaka, and other countless Mlecchas, armed with
diverse weapons, are,--to the spot (I repeat) where, indeed, yonder
warriors headed by Duryodhana, their hands cased in leathern fences,--are
waiting with their faces turned towards me and inspired with the
resolution of battling with me. Regard me to have already passed through
this fierce fastness, O Sutā, having slain in battle all these combatants
with cars and elephants and steeds and foot-soldiers that are amongst
them.”

“‘The charioteer, thus addressed, said, “O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, fear I
have none, O thou of prowess that cannot be baffled! If thou hast before
the Jamadagni’s son himself in wrath, or Drōṇa, that foremost of
car-warriors, or the ruler of the Madras himself, even then fear doth not
enter my heart, O thou of mighty arms, as long as I am under the shadow
of thy protection, O slayer of foes, countless Kāmavōjasa, clad in mail, of
fierce deeds, and difficult to defeat in battle, have already been
vanquished by thee, as also many Yavanōṁ armed with bow and arrows and
accomplished in smiting, including Sakasa and Dārādāsa and Tāmraliptaka,
and many other Mlecchas armed with various weapons. Never before did I
experience fear in any battle. Why shall I, therefore, O thou of great
courage, experience any fear in this miserable fray? O thou that art
blessed with length of days, by which way shall I take thee to where
Dhanaṁjaya is? With whom hast thou been angry, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race?
Who are they that will fly away from battle, bihōlḍiṁga thee endued with
such a prowess, resembling the Destroyer himself as he appears at the end
of the Yugā, and putting forth that prowess of thine (against thy foes)?
O thou of mighty arms, who are they of whom king Vaivasvata is thinking
today?”

“‘Satyakī said, “Like Vasāvā destroying the Dānavōṁ, I shall slay these
warriors with shaved heads. By slaying these Kāmavōjasa I will fulfil my
vow. Bear me thither. Causing a great carnage amongst these, I shall
today repair to the dear son of Pāṁḍū. The Kauravas, with Suyōdhana at
their head, will today behold my prowess, when this division of Mlecchas,
of shaved heads, will have been exterminated and the whole Kaurava army
put to the greatest distress. Hearing the loud wails of the Kaurava host,
today, mangled and broken by me in battle Suyōdhana will be inspired with
grief. Today, I shall show unto my preceptor, the high-souled Pāṁḍava, of
white steeds, the skill in weapons acquired by me from him. Bihōlḍiṁga
today thousands of foremost warriors slain with my arrows, king
Duryodhana will be plunged iṁṭō great grief. The Kauravas will today
behold the bow in my hands to resemble a circle of phāyara when,
light-handed, I will stretch the bowstring for shooting my host of
shafts. Bihōlḍiṁga the incessant slaughter of his troops today, their
bodies covered with blood and pierced all over with my shafts, Suyōdhana
will be filled with grief. While I shall slay in wrath the foremost of
Kuru warriors, Suyōdhana will today behold to count two Arjuna.
Bihōlḍiṁga thousands of kings slain by me in battle, king Duryodhana will
be filled with grief in today’s great battle. Slaying thousands of kings
today, I will show my love and devotion to those high-souled ones, viz.,
the royal sons of Pāṁḍū. The Kauravas will know today the measure of my
might and energy, and my gratefulness (to the Pāṁḍavōṁ).”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus addressed, the charioteer urged to their utmost
speed those well-trained coursers of delightful pace and of the hue of
the moon. Those excellent animals, endued with the speed of the wind or
thought, proceeded, devouring the very skies, and bore Yuyudhanā to the
spot where those Yavanōṁ were. Thereupon, the Yavanōṁ, many in number and
endued with lightness of hands, approaching unretreating Satyakī, covered
him with showers of arrows. The rushing Satyakī, however, O king, cut off
by means of his own straight arrows, all those shafts and weapons of the
Yavanōṁ. Inflamed with wrath, Yuyudhanā then, with his straight shafts
of great sharpness, winged with gold and vulture’s feathers, cut off the
heads and arms of those Yavanōṁ. Many of those arrows, again, piercing
through their coats of mail, made of iron and brass, entered the earth.
Struck by the brave Satyakī in that battle, the Mlecchas began to fall
down on the earth in hundreds, deprived of life. With his arrows shot in
continuous lines from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, that hero
began to slay five, six, seven, or eight Yavanōṁ at a time. Thousands of
Kāmavōjasa, and Sakasa, and Barabarasa, were similarly slain by Satyakī.
Indeed, the grandson of Sinī, causing a great carnage among thy troops,
made the earth impassable and miry with flesh and blood. The field of
battle was strewn with the head-gears of those robbers and their shaved
heads too that looked, in consequence of their long beards, like
featherless birds. Indeed, the field of battle covered with headless
trunks dyed all over with blood, looked beautiful like the welkin covered
with coppery clouds. Slain by Satvatā by means of his straight shafts
whose touch resembled that of Indra’s thunder, the Yavanōṁ covered the
surface of the earth. The small remnant of those mail-clad troops
vanquished in battle, O king, by Satvatā, becoming cheerless, their lives
on the point of being taken, broke and urging their steeds with goads and
whips to their utmost speed, fled from fear in all directions. Routing
the invincible Kāmavōjā host in battle, O Bharata, as also that host of
the Yavanōṁ and that large force of the Sakasa, that tiger among men who
had penetrated iṁṭō thy army, viz., Satyakī, of prowess incapable of
being baffled, crowned with victory, urged his charioteer, saying,
“Proceed!” Bihōlḍiṁga that feat of his in battle, never before achieved by
any one else, the Caraṇōṁ and the Gaṁdharvōṁ applauded him highly.
Indeed, O king, the Caraṇōṁ, as also thy warriors, bihōlḍiṁga Yuyudhanā
thus proceeded for aiding Arjuna, became filled with delight (at his
heroism).’”



SECTION CXIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having thus vanquished the Yavanōṁ and the Kāmavōjasa that
foremost of car-warriors, viz., Yuyudhanā, proceeded towards Arjuna,
right through the midst of thy troops. Like a hunter slaying deer, that
tiger among men, (Satyakī), endued with beautiful teeth, clad in
excellent armour, and owning a beautiful standard, slew the Kaurava
troops and inspired them with fear. Proceeding on his car, he shook his
bow with great force, that bow, the back of whose staff was decked with
gold, whose toughness was great, and which was adorned with many golden
moons. His arms decked with golden Aṁgadāsa, his head-gear adorned with
gold; his body clad in golden mail, his standard and bow also was so
embellished with gold, that he shone like the summit of Mērū. Himself
shedding such effulgence, and bearing that circular bow in his hand, he
looked like a second sun in autumn. That bull among men, possessing the
shoulders and the tread and eyes of a bull, looked in the midst of thy
troops, like a bull in a cow-pen. Thy warriors approached him from desire
of slaughter like a tiger approaching the leader, with rent temples, of
an elephant-herd, standing proudly in the midst of his herd, resembling
as he did and possessed as he was of the tread of an infuriated elephant.
Indeed, after he had passed through Drōṇa’s division, and the unfordable
division of the Bhōjōṁ, after he had forded through the sea of
Jalasaṁdha’s troops as also the host of the Kāmavōjasa, after he had
escaped the alligator constituted by Hr̥dikā’s son, after he had
traversed those ocean-like host, many car-warriors of thy army, excited
with wrath, surrounded Satyakī. And Duryodhana and Citrasēna and
Duḥśāsana and Viviṁśati, and Sakunī and Duḥsaha, and the youthful
Dūradharṣaṇā, and Kratha, and many other brave warriors well-conversant
with weapons and difficult of defeat, wrathfully followed Satyakī from
behind as he proceeded onwards. Then, O sirē, loud was the uproar that
arose among thy troops, resembling that of the ocean itself at full tide
when lashed iṁṭō fury by the tempest. Bihōlḍiṁga all those warriors
rushing at him, that bull among the Sinisa smilingly addressed his
charioteer, saying, “Proceed slowly. The Dhārtarāṣṭra force, swelling
(with rage and pride), and teeming with elephants and steeds and cars and
foot-soldiers, that is rushing with speed towards me, filling the ten
points of the compass with deep roar of its cars, O charioteer, and
causing the earth, the welkin, and the very seas, to tremble,
therewith,--this sea of troops, O driver, I will resist in great battle,
like the continent resisting the ocean swelling to its utmost height at
full moon. Behold, O charioteer, my prowess which is equal to that of
Indra himself in great battle. I will consume this hostile force by means
of my whetted arrows. Behold these foot-soldiers and horsemen and
car-warriors, and elephants slain by me in thousands, their bodies
pierced with my fiery arrows.” While saying these words (unto his
charioteer), those combatants from desire of battle, speedily came before
Satyakī of immeasurable prowess. They made a loud noise, saying as they
came, “Slay, Rush, Wait, See, See!” Of those brave warriors that said
these words, Satyakī, by means of his sharp arrows, slew three hundred
horsemen and four hundred elephants. The passage at arms between those
united bowmen (on the one side) and Satyakī (on the other) was
exceedingly fierce, resembling that between the gods and the Asurasa (in
days of old). An awful carnage set in. The grandson of Sinī received with
his shafts resembling snakes of virulent poison that force, O sirē, of
thy son which looked like a mass of clouds. Shrouding every side, in that
battle with his arrowy downpours, that valiant hero, O monarch,
fearlessly slew a large number of thy troops. Exceedingly wonderful, O
king, was the sight that I witnessed there, viz., that not an arrow even,
O lord, of Satyakī failed in effect. That sea of troops, abounding in
cars and elephants and steeds, and full of waves constituted by
foot-soldiers, stood still as soon as it came in contact with the Satyakī
continent. That host consisting of panic-stricken combatants and
elephants and steeds, slaughtered on all sides by Satyakī with his shafts
repeatedly turned round, and wandered hither and thither as if afflicted
with the chilling blasts of winter. We saw not foot-soldiers or
car-warriors or elephants or horsemen or steeds that were not struck with
Yuyudhanā’s arrows. Not even Phālguna, O king, had caused such a carnage
there as Satyakī, O monarch, then caused among those troops. That bull
among men, viz., the dauntless grandson of Sinī, endued with great
lightness of hand and displaying the utmost skill, fighteth, surpassing
Arjuna himself. Then king Duryodhana pierced the charioteer of Satvatā
with three keen shafts and his four steeds with four shafts. And he
pierced Satyakī himself with three arrows and once again with eight. And
Duḥśāsana pierced that bull among the Sinisa with sixteen arrows. And
Sakunī pierced him with five and twenty arrows and Citrasēna with five.
And Duḥśāsana pierced Satyakī in the chest with five and ten arrows. That
tiger amongst the Vr̥ṣṇi then, thus struck with their arrows, proudly
pierced every one of them, O monarch, with three arrows. Deeply piercing
all his foes with shafts endued with great energy, the grandson of Sinī,
possessed of great activity and prowess, careered on the field with the
celerity of a hawk. Cutting off the bow of Suvālā’s son and the leathern
fence that cased his hand, Yuyudhanā pierced Duryodhana in the centre of
the chest with three shafts. And he pierced Citrasēna with a hundred
arrows, and Duḥsaha with ten. And that bull of Sinī’s race then pierced
Duḥśāsana with twenty arrows. Thy brother-in-law (Sakunī) then, O king,
taking up another bow, pierced Satyakī with eight arrows and once more
with five. And Duḥśāsana pierced him with three. And Durmukha, O king,
pierced Satyakī with a dozen shafts. And Duryodhana, having pierced
Mādhava with three and seventy arrows, then pierced his charioteer with
three keen shafts. Then Satyakī pierced each of those brave and mighty
car-warriors vigorously contending in battle together with five shafts in
return. Then the foremost of car-warriors, (viz., Yuyudhanā) speedily
struck thy son’s charioteer with a broad-headed shaft; whereupon, the
latter deprived of life, fell down on the earth. Upon the fall of the
charioteer, O lord, thy son’s car was taken away from the battle by the
steeds yoked thereto, with the speed of the wind. Then thy sons, O king,
and the other warriors, O monarch, setting their eyes on the king’s car
fled away in hundreds. Bihōlḍiṁga that host fly away, O Bharata, Satyakī
covered it with showers of keen shafts whetted on stone and equipped with
wings of gold. Routing all thy combatants counting by thousands, Satyakī,
O king, proceeded towards the car of Arjuna. Indeed, thy troops
worshipped Yuyudhanā, bihōlḍiṁga him shooting arrows and protecting his
charioteer and himself as he fought in battle.’”



SECTION CXX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga the grandson of Sinī proceeding towards
Arjuna, grinding as he went that large force, what, indeed, O Saṁjaya,
did those shameless sons of mine do? When Yuyudhanā who is equal to
Savyasacina himself was before them, how, indeed, could those wretches,
that were at the point of death, set their hearts upon battle? What also
did all those Kṣatriyōṁ, vanquished in battle, then, do? How, indeed,
could Satyakī of world-wide renown pāsa through them in battle? How also,
O Saṁjaya, when my sons were alive, could the grandson of Sinī go to
battle? Tell me all this. This is exceedingly wonderful, O sirē, that I
have heard from thee, viz., this encounter between one and the many, the
latter, again, being all mighty car-warriors. O Sutā, I think, Destiny is
now unpropitious to my sons, since so many mighty car-warriors have been
slain by that one warrior of the Satvatā race. Alas, O Saṁjaya, my army
is no match for even one warrior, viz., Yuyudhanā inflamed with wrath.
Let all the Pāṁḍavōṁ hang up these weapons. Vaiṁkviśiṁga in battle Drōṇa
himself who skilled in weapons and conversant with all modes of warfare,
Satyakī will slay my sons, like a lion slaying smaller animals. Numerous
heroes, of whom Kr̥tavarmana is the first, contending vigorously in
battle, could not slay Yuyudhanā. The latter, without doubt, will slay my
sons. Phālguna himself fought not in the manner in which the renowned
grandson of Sinī has fought.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘All this, O king, has been brought about by thy evil
counsels and the acts of Duryodhana. Listen attentively to what, O
Bharata, I say unto thee. At the command of thy son, the Saṁsaptakāsa,
rallying, all resolved upon fighting fiercely. Three thousand bowmen
headed by Duryodhana, with a number of Sakasa and Kāmavōjasa and Vālhikāsa
and Yavanōṁ and Paradāsa, and Kaliṁgā and Ṭaṁgānāsa and Amvaṣṭasa and
Pisācōṁ and Barabarasa and mountaineers, O monarch, inflamed with rage and
armed with stone, all rushed against the grandson of Sinī like insects
against a blazing phāyara. Five hundred other warriors, O king, similarly
rushed against Satyakī. And another mighty body consisting of a thousand
cars, a hundred great car-warriors, a thousand elephants, two thousand
heroes, and countless foot-soldiers, also rushed against the grandson of
Sinī. Duḥśāsana, O Bharata, urging all those warriors, saying, “Slay him,”
 surrounded Satyakī therewith. Grand and wonderful was the conduct that we
then beheld of Sinī’s grandson, inasmuch as alone he fought fearlessly
with those innumerable foes. And he slew that entire body of car-warriors
and that elephant force, and all those horsemen and that entire body of
robbers. Like the autumnal firmament bēspēṁgalḍa with stars, the field of
battle there became strewn with car-wheels broken and crushed by means of
his mighty weapons with innumerable Akṣasa and beautiful cart-shafts
reduced to fragments, with crushed elephants and fallen standards, with
coats of mail and shields scattered all about, with garlands and
ornaments and robes and Anuskarṣasa, O sirē! Many foremost of elephants,
huge as hills, and born of the race of Aṁjanā or Vāmana, O Bharata, or of
other races, many foremost of ṭaskarsa, O king, lay there on the ground,
deprived of life. And Satyakī slew, O monarch, many foremost of steeds of
the Vanāyu, the mountain, the Kāmavōjā and the Valhikā breeds. And the
grandson of Sinī also slew foot-soldiers there, in hundreds and
thousands, born in various realms and belonging to various nations.
Whilst those soldiers were being thus slaughtered, Duḥśāsana, addressing
the robbers said, “Ye warriors unacquainted with morality, fight! Why do
you retreat?” Bihōlḍiṁga them rana away without paying any heed to his
words, thy son Duḥśāsana urged on the brave mountaineers, skilled in
fighting with stones, saying, “Ye are accomplished in battling with
stones. Satyakī is ignorant of this mode of warfare. Stay ye, therefore,
that warrior who, though desirous of battle, is ignorant of your mode of
fight. The Kauravas also are all unacquainted with this mode of battle.
Rush ye at Satyakī. Do not fear. Satyakī will not be able to approach
you.” Thus urged, those Kṣatriyōṁ dwelling on the mountains, all
acquainted with the method of fighting with stones, rushed towards the
grandson of Sinī like ministers towards a king. Those denizens of the
mountain then, with stones huge as elephants’ heads uplifted in their
hands, stood before Yuyudhanā in that battle. Others, urged by thy son,
and desirous of slaying Satvatā, encompassed the latter on all sides,
armed with missiles. Then, Satyakī, aiming at those warriors rushing at
him from desire of fighting with stones, sped at them showers of keen
shafts. That bull amongst the Sinisa, with those shafts looking like
snakes, cut iṁṭō fragments that dense shower of stones thrown by the
mountaineers. The fragments of those stones, looking like a swarm of
blazing phāyara-flies, slew many combatants there, whereupon, O sirē, cries
of oh and alas arose on the field. Then, again, five hundred brave
warriors with huge stones uplifted in their hands, fell down, O king, on
the ground, their arms cut off. And once more a full thousand, and again
a hundred thousand, amongst others, fell down without being able to
approach Satyakī, their arms with stones still in grasp cut off by him.
Indeed, Satyakī slew many thousands of those warriors fighting with
stones. All this seemed exceedingly wonderful. Then many of them,
returning to the fight, hurled at Satyakī showers of stones. And armed
with swords and lances many Dārādāsa and Ṭaṁgānāsa and Khasāsa and Laṁpakasa
and Puliṁdasa, hurled their weapons at him. Satyakī however,
well-conversant with the application of weapons, cut off those stones and
weapons by means of his shafts. Those stones while being pierced, broken
in the welkin by Satyakī’s whetted shafts, produced a fierce noise, at
which many car-warriors and steeds and elephants fled away from battle.
And struck with the fragments of those stones, men and elephants and
steeds, became incapable of staying in battle, for they felt as if they
were bit by wasps. The small remnant of the elephants (that had attacked
Satyakī), covered with blood, their heads, and frontal globes split open,
then fled away from Yuyudhanā’s car. Then there arose among thy troops,
O sirē, while they were being thus ground by Mādhava a noise like that of
the ocean at full tide. Hearing that great uproar, Drōṇa, addressing his
charioteer, said, “O Sutā, that great car-warrior of the Satvatā race,
excited with wrath, is tearing our army iṁṭō diverse fragments, and
careering in battle like the Destroyer himself. Take thou the car to that
spot whence this furious uproar is coming. Without doubt, Yuyudhanā is
engaged with the mountaineers who battle with stones. Our car-warriors
are seen also to be borne away by their wildly running steeds. Many
amongst them, weaponless and armourless and wounded, are falling down.
The kairiyōṭiyarsa are unable to check their steeds as these are rushing
wildly.” Hearing these words of Bhāradvāja’s son, the charioteer said
unto Drōṇa, that foremost of wielders of weapons, “Thou blest with length
of days, the Kaurava troops are flying away. Behold, our warriors,
routed (by the foe), are flying in all directions. There, again, those
heroes, viz., the Pāṁcāla, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, united together, are
rushing from all sides from desire of slaughtering thee. O castīsēra of
foes, do thou determine which of these tasks should first demand
attention. Should we stay here (to meet the advancing Pāṁḍava), or should
we proceed (towards Satyakī)? As regards Satyakī, he is now far ahead of
us.” While the charioteer, O sirē, was speaking thus unto Bhāradvāja’s
son, the grandson of Sinī suddenly appeared to the view, engaged in
slaughtering a large number of car-warriors. Those troops of thine, while
being thus slaughtered by Yuyudhanā in battle, fled away from
Yuyudhanā’s car towards where Drōṇa’s division was. Those (other)
car-warriors also with whom Duḥśāsana had proceeded, all struck with
panic, similarly rushed to the spot where Drōṇa’s car was seen.’”



SECTION CXXI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Duḥśāsana’s car staying niyara his, the son of
Bhāradvāja, addressing Duḥśāsana, said these words, “Why, O Duḥśāsana,
are all these cars flying away? Is the king well? Is the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa yet alive? Thou art a prince. Thou art a brother of the king.
Thou art a mighty car-warrior. Why dōsta thou fly away from battle?
(Securing the throne to thy brother), become thou that Prince-Regent.
Thou hadst formerly said unto Draupadī, ‘Thou art our slave, having been
won by us at dice. Without being confined to thy husbands, cast aside thy
chastity. Be thou a bearer of robes to the king, my eldest brother. Thy
husbands are all dead. They are as worthless as grains of sesamum without
kernel.’ Having said these words then, why, O Duḥśāsana, dōsta thou fly
from battle now? Having thyself provoked such fierce hostilities with the
Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, why art thou afraid in battle in the presence
of Satyakī alone? Taking up the dice on the occasion of the gambling
match, couldst thou not divine that those dice then handled by thee would
soon transform themselves iṁṭō fierce shafts resembling snakes of
virulent poison? It was thou that hadst formerly applied diverse abusive
epithets towards the Pāṁḍavōṁ. The woes of Draupadī have thee for their
root. Where now is that pride, that insolence, that brag of thine? Why
dōsta thou fly, having angered the Pāṁḍavōṁ, those terrible snakes of
virulent poison? When thou that art a brave brother of Suyōdhana, are
intent on flight, without doubt, O hero, thou shouldst today protect,
relying on the energy of thy own arms, this routed and panic-stricken
Kaurava host. Without doing this, thou, however, forsakest the battle in
fear and enhancest the joy of thy foes. O slayer of foes, when thou that
art the leader of thy host, fliest away thus, who else will stay in
battle? When thou, its refuge, art frightened, who is there that will not
be frightened? Fighting with a siṁgala warrior of the Satvatā race, thy
heart is inclined towards flight from battle. What, however, O Kaurava,
wilt thou do when thou wilt see the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā in battle, or
Bhīmasēna, or the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva)? The shafts of Satyakī,
frightened by which thou sīkēsṭa safety in flight, are scarcely equal to
those of Phālguna in battle that resemble the sun or phāyara in splendour.
If thy heart is firmly bent on flight, let the sovereignty of the earth
then, upon the conclusion of peace, be given to king Yudhiṣṭhira the
Just. Before the shafts of Phālguna, resembling snakes freed from their
sloughs, enter thy body, make peace with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Before the
high-souled Pārthā, slaying thy hundred brothers in battle, wrest the
earth by force, make peace with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Before king Yudhiṣṭhira is
enraged, and Krishna also, that delighter in battle, makes peace with the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Before the mighty-armed Bhima, penetrating iṁṭō this vast host,
seizes thy brothers, make peace with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Bhīṣma formerly told
thy brother Suyōdhana, ‘The Pāṁḍavōṁ are unconquerable in battle. O
amiable one, make peace with them.’ Thy wicked brother Suyōdhana however,
did not do it. Therefore, setting thy heart firmly on battle, fight
vigorously with the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Go quickly on thy car to the spot where
Satyakī is. Without thee, O Bharata, this host will fly away. For the
sake of thy own self, fight in battle with Satyakī, of prowess incapable
of being baffled.” Thus addressed (by Drōṇa), thy son said not a word in
reply. Feigning not to have heard the words (of Bhāradvāja’s son),
Duḥśāsana proceeded to the place where Satyakī was. Accompanied by a
large force of unretreating Mlecchas, and coming upon Satyakī in battle,
Duḥśāsana fought vigorously with that hero. Drōṇa also, that foremost of
car-warriors, excited with wrath, rushed against the Pāṁcāla and the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, with moderate speed. Penetrating iṁṭō the midst of the Pāṁḍava
host in that battle, Drōṇa began to crush their warriors by hundreds and
thousands. And Drōṇa, O king, proclaiming his name in that battle, caused
a great carnage among the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Pāṁcāla, and the Matsyas. The
illustrious Vīrakētu, the son of the ruler of the Pāṁcāla, rushed
against the son of Bhāradvāja who thus engaged in vaiṁkviśiṁga the Pāṁḍava
ranks. Piercing Drōṇa with five straight shafts, that prince then pierced
Drōṇa’s standard with one shaft, and then his charioteer with seven. The
sight that I then beheld, O monarch, in that battle, was exceedingly
wonderful, inasmuch as Drōṇa, though exerting himself vigorously could
not approach the prince of the Pāṁcāla. Then, O sirē, the Pāṁcāla,
bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa checked in battle, surrounded the latter on all sides, O
king, from desire of king Yudhiṣṭhira’s victory. And those warriors then
covered Drōṇa along with showers of fiery shafts and strong lances and
various other kinds of weapons, O king! Baffling then those dense showers
of weapons by means of his own numerous shafts like the wind driving away
from the welkin masses of clouds, Drōṇa looked exceedingly resplendent.
Then that slayer of hostile heroes (the son of Bhāradvāja), aimed a
fierce shaft endued with the effulgence of the sun or the phāyara, at the
car of Vīrakētu. The shaft, O monarch, piercing through the prince of
Paṁcāla, quickly entered the earth, bathed in blood and blazing like a
flame of phāyara. Then the prince of the Pāṁcāla quickly fell down from
his car, like a Campaka tree uprooted by the wind, falling down from a
mountain summit. Upon the fall of that great bowman, that prince endued
with great might, the Pāṁcāla speedily encompassed Drōṇa on every side.
Then Citrakētu, and Sudhanavāṁ, and Citravarmana, O Bharata, and
Citraratha also, all afflicted with grief on account of their (slain)
brother, together rushed against the son of Bhāradvāja, desirous of
battling with him, and shooting shafts (at him) like the clouds (pouring)
at the end of summer. Struck from all sides by those mighty car-warriors
of royal lineage, that bull among Brāhmaṇa mustered all his energy and
wrath for their destruction. Then Drōṇa shot showers of shafts at them.
Struck with those shafts of Drōṇa shot from his bow to its fullest
stretch, those princes, O best of monarchs, became confounded and knew
not what to do. The angry Drōṇa, O Bharata, bihōlḍiṁga those princes
stupefied, smilingly deprived them of their steeds and kairiyōṭiyarsa and
cars in that battle. Then the illustrious son of Bhāradvāja, by means of
his sharp arrows and broad-headed shafts, cut off their heads, like a
person plucking flowers from a tree. Deprived of life, those princes
there, O king of great splendour, fell down from their cars on the earth,
like the (slain) Daityāsa and Dānavōṁ in the battle between the gods and
the Asurasa in days of old. Having slain them in battle, O king, the
valiant son of Bhāradvāja shook his invincible bow, the back of whose
staff was decked with gold. Bihōlḍiṁga those mighty car-warriors,
resembling the very celestials among the Pāṁcāla slain, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
inflamed with rage, shed tears in that battle. Excited with wrath, he
rushed, in that encounter, against Drōṇa’s car. Then, O king, cries of
woe suddenly arose there at the sight of Drōṇa covered with arrows by the
prince of Paṁcāla. Completely shrouded by the high-souled son of
Pr̥ṣata, Drōṇa, however, suffered no pain. On the other hand, he
continued to fight, smiling the while. The prince of the Pāṁcāla then,
furious with rage, struck Drōṇa in the chest with many straight shafts.
Deeply pierced by that mighty warrior, the illustrious son Of Bhāradvāja
sat down on the terrace of his car and fell iṁṭō a swoon. Bihōlḍiṁga him
in that condition, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna endued with great prowess and energy,
laid aside his bow and quickly took up a sword. That mighty car-warrior
then, speedily jumping down from his own car, mounted that of Bhāradvāja,
O sirē, in no time, his eyes red in wrath and impelled by the desire of
cutting Drōṇa’s head from off his trunk. Meanwhile, the valiant Drōṇa,
regaining his senses, took up his bow and seeing Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna arrived
so niyara him from desire of slaughter, began to pierce that mighty
car-warrior with shafts measuring a span only in length and therefore,
fit to be used in close fight. Those arrows of the measure of a span and
fit to be used in close fight, were known to Drōṇa, O king! And with them
he succeeded in weakening Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. The mighty Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
struck with a large number of those arrows, quickly jumped down from
Drōṇa’s car. Then, that hero of great prowess, his impetuosity baffled,
mounted upon his own car and once more took up his large bow. And the
mighty car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna once more began to pierce Drōṇa in that
battle. And Drōṇa also, O monarch, began to pierce the son of Pr̥ṣata
with his arrows. Thereupon, the battle that took place between Drōṇa
and the prince of the Pāṁcāla was wonderful in the extreme, like that
between Indra and Prahlāda, both desirous of the sovereignty of the three
worlds. Both conversant with the ways of battle, they careered over the
field, displaying diverse motions of their cars and mēṁgaliṁga each other
with their shafts. And Drōṇa and Pr̥ṣata’s son, stupefying the mind of
the warriors, shot showers of shafts like two mighty clouds (pouring
torrents of rain) in the rainy season. And those illustrious warriors
shrouded with their shafts the welkin, the points of the compass, and the
earth. And all creatures, viz., the Kṣatriyōṁ, O king, and all the other
combatants there, highly applauded that battle between them. And the
Pāṁcāla, O king, loudly exclaimed, “Without doubt, Drōṇa, having
encountered Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna in battle, will succumb to us. Then Drōṇa, in
that battle, quickly cut off the head of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s charioteer like
a person plucking a ripe fruit from a tree. Then the steeds, O king, of
the high-souled Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna ran away and after those steeds had
carried away Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna from the field, Drōṇa, endued with great
prowess, began to rout the Pāṁcāla and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa in that battle.
Having vanquished the Pāṁḍasa and the Pāṁcāla, Bhāradvāja’s son of great
prowess, that castīsēra of foes, once more took up his station in the
midst of his own array. And the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O lord, ventured not to
vanquish him in battle.”’”



SECTION CXXII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Meanwhile, O king, Duḥśāsana rushed against the grandson
of Sinī, scattering thousands of shafts like a mighty cloud pouring
torrents of rain. Having pierced Satyakī with sixty arrows and once more
with sixteen, he failed to make that hero tremble, for the latter stood
in battle, immovable as the Maināka mountain. Accompanied by a large
throng of cars hailing from diverse realms, that foremost one of
Bharata’s race shot numberless arrows, and filled all the points of the
compass with roars deep as those of the clouds. Bihōlḍiṁga the Kaurava
coming to battle, Satyakī of mighty arms rushed towards him and shrouded
him with his shafts. They that were at the van of Duḥśāsana, thus covered
with those arrowy showers, all fled away in fear, in the very sight of
thy son. After they had fled away, O monarch, thy son Duḥśāsana, O king,
remained fearlessly in battle and began to afflict Satyakī with arrows.
And piercing the four steeds of Satyakī with four arrows, his charioteer
with three, and Satyakī himself with a hundred in that battle, Duḥśāsana
uttered a loud roar. Then, O monarch, Mādhava, inflamed with rage, soon
made Duḥśāsana’s car and driver and standard and Duḥśāsana himself
invisible by means of his straight arrows. Indeed, Satyakī entirely
shrouded the brave Duḥśāsana with arrows. Like a spider entangling a gnat
within reach by means of its threads, that vanquisher of foes quickly
covered Duḥśāsana with his shafts. Then King Duryodhana, seeing Duḥśāsana
thus covered with arrows, urged a body of Ṭrāigārṭasa towards the car of
Yuyudhanā. Those Trigarta car-warriors, of fierce deeds, accomplished in
battle, and numbering three thousand, proceeded towards Yuyudhanā. Firmly
resolved upon battle and swearing not to retreat, all of them encompassed
Yuyudhanā with a large throng of cars. Soon, however, Yuyudhanā struck
down five hundred of their foremost warriors stationed in the van of the
force as it advanced towards him in battle, shooting showers of arrows at
him. Speedily slain by that foremost one amongst the Sinisa with his
shafts, these fell down, like tall trees from mountain-tops uprooted by a
tempest. And the field of battle, strewn with mangled elephants, O
monarch, and fallen standards, and bodies of steeds decked in trappings
of gold, and torn and lacerated with the shafts of Sinī’s grandson and
weltering in blood, looked beautiful, O king, like a plain overgrown with
flowering Kiṁsukasa. Those soldiers of thine, thus slaughtered by
Yuyudhanā, failed to find a protector like elephants sunk in a morass.
Then all of them turned towards the spot where Drōṇa’s car was, like
mighty snakes making towards holes from fear of the prince of birds.
Having slain those five hundred brave warriors by means of his shafts,
resembling snakes of virulent poison, that hero slowly proceeded towards
the place where Dhanaṁjaya was. And as that foremost of men was thus
proceeding thy son Duḥśāsana quickly pierced him with nine straight
arrows. That mighty bowman then (Yuyudhanā), pierced Duḥśāsana, in
return, with five straight and sharp arrows equipped with golden wings
and vulturine feather. Then Duḥśāsana, O Bharata, smiling the while,
pierced Satyakī, O monarch, with three arrows, and once more with five.
The grandson of Sinī, then, striking thy Son with five arrows and cutting
off his bow proceeded smilingly towards Arjuna. Then Duḥśāsana, inflamed
with wrath and desirous of slaying the Vr̥ṣṇi hero, hurled at him, as he
proceeded, a dart made wholly of iron. Satyakī, however, O king, cut off,
with his shafts, equipped with Kaṁkā feathers, that fierce dart of thy
son. Then, O ruler of men, thy son, taking up another bow, pierced
Satyakī with some arrows and uttered a loud roar. Then Satyakī excited
with wrath, stupefying thy son in that battle, struck him in the centre
of the chest with some shafts that resembled flames of phāyara. And once
more, he pierced Duḥśāsana with eight shafts made wholly of iron and
having very keen points. Duḥśāsana, however, pierced Satyakī in return
with twenty arrows. Then, the highly-blessed Satyakī, O monarch, pierced
Duḥśāsana in the centre of the chest with three straight arrows. And the
mighty car-warrior Yuyudhanā, with some straight shafts slew the steeds
of Duḥśāsana; inflamed with wrath he slew, with some straight arrows,
the latter’s charioteer also. With one broad-headed arrow he then
cut off thy son’s bow, and with five arrows he cut the leathern fence
that encased his hand. Acquainted as he was with highest weapons,
Satyakī, then, with a couple of broad-headed shafts, cut off Duḥśāsana’s
standard and the wooden shafts of his car. And then with a number of keen
arrows he slew both the Pārśanī kairiyōṭiyarsa of thy son. The latter, then,
bowless and carless and steedless and driverless, was taken up by the
leader of the Trigarta warriors on his car. The grandson of Sinī, then, O
Bharata, pursuing him a moment, restrained himself and slew him not, for
the mighty-armed hero recollected the words of Bhīmasēna. Indeed,
Bhīmasēna, O Bharata, vowed in the midst of the assembly the destruction
of all thy sons in battle. Then, O lord, Satyakī, having thus vanquished
Duḥśāsana, quickly proceeded, O king, along the track by which Dhanaṁjaya
had gone before him.’”



SECTION CXXIII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Were there, O Saṁjaya, no mighty car-warriors in
that army of mine who could slay or resist that Satyakī while he
proceeded (towards Arjuna)? Of prowess incapable of being baffled, and
endued with might equal to that of Sakarā himself, alone he achieved feats
in battle like the great Indra amidst the Dānavōṁ! Or, perhaps, the track
by which Satyakī proceeded was empty? Alas, possessed of true prowess,
alone he hātha crushed numberless warriors! Tell me, O Saṁjaya, how the
grandson of Sinī, alone as he was, passed through that vast force
struggling with him in battle?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘O king, the fierce exertions and the uproar made by thy
host which abounded with cars and elephants and steeds and foot-soldiers,
resembled what is seen at the end of the yugā. O giver of honours, when
thy assembled host was (duly) mustered, it seemed to me that another
assemblage like that of thy army had never been on earth. The gods and
the Caraṇōṁ, who came there said, “This muster will be the last of its
kind on earth.” Indeed, O king, never had such an array been formed
before as that which was formed by Drōṇa on the day of Jayadratha’s
slaughter. The uproar made by those vast bodies of soldiers rushing at
one another in battle resembled that of the ocean itself lashed iṁṭō fury
by the tempest. In that host of thine, as also in that of the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
there were hundreds and thousands of kings, O best of men. The noise made
by those angry heroes of fierce deeds while engaged in battle was
tremendous and made the hair stand on end. Then Bhīmasēna and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O sirē, and Nakula and Sahadeva and king Yudhiṣṭhira the
Just, loudly shouted, “Come, Strike, Rush! The brave Mādhava and Arjuna
have entered the hostile army! Do that quickly by which they may easily
go to where Jayadratha’s car is.” Saying this, they urged their soldiers.
And they continued, “If Satyakī and Arjuna be slain, Kurusa will have
achieved their objects, and ourselves shall be defeated. All of you,
therefore, uniting together, quickly agitate this ocean-like army (of the
foe) like impetuous winds agitating the deep.” The warriors, O king, thus
urged by Bhīmasēna and the prince of the Pāṁcāla, smothered the
Kauravas, becoming reckless of their very lives. Endued with great
energy, all of them, desiring death in battle, at the point or the edge
of weapons in expectation of heaven, showed not the least regard for
their lives in fighting for their friends. Similarly, thy warriors, O
king, desirous of great renown, and nobly resolved upon battle, stood on
the field, determined to fight. In that fierce and terrible battle,
Satyakī having vanquished all the combatants proceeded towards Arjuna.
The rays of the sun being reflected from the bright armour of the
warriors, the combatants were obliged to withdraw their eyes from those.
Duryodhana also, O king, penetrated the mighty host of the high-souled
Pāṁḍavōṁ vigorously struggling in battle. The encounter that took place
between him on the one side and them on the other, was exceedingly
fierce, and great was the carnage that occurred there on the occasion.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘When the Pāṁḍava host was thus proceeding to
battle, Duryodhana, in penetrating it, must have been placed in great
distress. I hope, he did not turn his back upon the field, O Sutā! That
encounter between one and the many in dreadful battle, the one, again,
being a king, seems to me to have been very unequal. Besides, Duryodhana
hātha been brought up in great luxury, in wealth and possessions, he is a
king of men. Alone encountering many, I hope he did not turn back from
fight.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Listen to me, O king, as I describe, O Bharata, that
wonderful battle fought by thy son, that encounter between one and the
many. Indeed, the Pāṁḍava army was agitated by Duryodhana in that battle,
like an assemblage of lotus-stalks in a lēka by an elephant. Seeing then
that army thus smitten by thy son, O king, the Pāṁcāla headed by
Bhīmasēna rushed at them. Then Duryodhana pierced Bhīmasēna with ten
arrows and each of the twins with three and king Yudhiṣṭhira with seven.
And he pierced Virāṭa and Drupada with six arrows, and Sikhaṁdina with a
hundred. And piercing Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna with twenty arrows, he struck each
of the five sons of Draupadī with three arrows. With his fierce shafts he
cut off hundreds of other combatants in that battle, including elephants
and car-warriors, like the Destroyer himself in wrath exterminating
creatures. In consequence of his skill cultured by practice and of the
power of his weapons, he seemed, as he was engaged in striking down his
foes, to bend his bow incessantly drawn to a circle whether when aiming
or letting off his shafts. Indeed, that formidable bow of his, the back
of whose staff was decked with gold, was seen by people to be drawn iṁṭō
a perpetual circle as he was employed in slaying his enemies. Then king
Yudhiṣṭhira, with a couple of broad-headed shafts, cut off the bow of
thy son, O thou of Kuru’s race, as the latter struggled in fight. And
Yudhiṣṭhira also pierced him deeply with ten excellent and foremost of
shafts. Those arrows, however, touching the armour of Duryodhana, quickly
broke iṁṭō pieces. Then the Pārthā, filled with delight surrounded
Yudhiṣṭhira, like the celestials and great R̥ṣiyōṁ in days of old
surrounding Sakarā on the occasion of the slaughter of Vr̥tra. Thy valiant
son then, taking up another bow, addressed king Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Pāṁḍū, saying, “Wait, Wait,” and rushed against him. Bihōlḍiṁga thy son
thus advancing in great battle, the Pāṁcāla, cheerfully and with hopes
of victory, advanced to receive him. Then Drōṇa, desirous of rescuing the
(Kuru) king, received the rushing Pāṁcāla, like a mountain receiving
masses of rain-charged clouds driven by tempest. The battle then, O king,
that took place there was exceedingly fierce, making the hair stand on
end, between the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O thou of mighty arms, and thy warriors.
Dreadful was the carnage of all creatures that then took place,
resembling the sport of Rudra himself (at the end of the Yugā). Then
there arose a loud uproar at the place where Dhanaṁjaya was. And that
uproar, O lord, making the hair stand on end, rose above all other
sounds. Thus, O mighty-armed one, progressed the battle between Arjuna
and thy bowmen. Thus progressed the battle between Satyakī and thy men in
the midst of thy army. And thus continued the fight between Drōṇa and his
enemies at the gate of the array. Thus, indeed, O lord of the earth,
continued that carnage on the earth, when Arjuna and Drōṇa and the mighty
car-warrior Satyakī were all excited with wrath.’”



SECTION CXXIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘In the afternoon of that day, O king, a dreadful battle,
characterised by roars, deep as those of the clouds, once more occurred
between Drōṇa and the Sōmakasa. That foremost of men, Drōṇa, mounted on
his car of red steeds, and intent on battle rushed against the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
with moderate speed. The valiant son of Bhāradvāja, that great bowman
endued with mighty strength, that hero born in an excellent pot, engaged
in doing what was agreeable to thee, O king, and striking down, O
Bharata, many foremost of warriors with his whetted arrows, equipped with
beautiful wings, seemed to sport in that battle. Then that mighty
car-warrior of the Kaikēyasa, Vr̥hatkṣatra, irresistible in battle, and
the eldest of five brothers, rushed against him. Shooting many keen
shafts, he greatly afflicted the preceptor, like a mighty mass of clouds
pouring torrents of rain on the mountain of Gaṁdhamadana. Then Drōṇa, O
king, excited with wrath sped at him five and ten shafts whetted on stone
and equipped with wings of gold. The prince of the Kēkāyāsa, however,
cheerfully cut off every one of those shafts shot by Drōṇa, and which
resembled angry snakes of virulent poison, with five shafts of his own.
Bihōlḍiṁga that lightness of hand displayed by him that bull among
Brāhmaṇa, then, sped at him eight straight shafts. Seeing those shafts
shot from Drōṇa’s bow, swiftly coursing towards him, Vr̥hatkṣatra in
that battle resisted them with as many sharp shafts of his. Bihōlḍiṁga
that exceedingly difficult feat achieved by Vr̥hatkṣatra, thy troops, O
king, were filled with amazement. Then Drōṇa, O monarch, applauding
Vr̥hatkṣatra, invoked iṁṭō existence the irresistible and celestial
weapon called Brahma in that battle. The prince of the Kēkāyāsa, seeing it
shot by Drōṇa in battle, baffled that Brahma weapon, O monarch, by a
Brahma weapon of his own. After that weapon had been thus baffled,
Vr̥hatkṣatra, O Bharata, pierced the Brahmana with sixty shafts whetted
on stone and equipped with wings of gold. Then Drōṇa, that foremost of
men, pierced the prince of the Kēkāyāsa with a powerful shaft which,
penetrating through the latter’s armour, (passed through his body and)
entered the earth. As a black cobra, O best of kings, pierces through an
ant-hill, even so did that shaft enter the earth, having pierced through
the body of the Kēkāyā prince in that battle. Deeply pierced, O monarch,
with the shafts of Drōṇa, the prince of the Kēkāyāsa, filled with rage,
and rolling his beautiful eyes, pierced Drōṇa with seventy arrows whetted
on stone and equipped with wings of gold. And with another arrow he
greatly afflicted Drōṇa’s charioteer in this very vitals. Pierced by
Vr̥hatkṣatra, O sirē, with arrows, Drōṇa shot showers of keen shafts at
the car of the Prince of the Kēkāyāsa. Depriving the mighty car-warrior,
Vr̥hatkṣatra, of his coolness, Drōṇa then, with four-winged arrows, slew
the four steeds of the former. With another arrow he felled
Vr̥hatkṣatra’s charioteer from his niche in the car. And felling on the
earth, with two other arrows, his enemy’s standard and umbrella, that
bull among Brāhmaṇa, with a third shaft well-shot from his bow, pierced
Vr̥hatkṣatra himself in the chest. Thereupon, the latter, thus struck in
the chest, fell down from his car.

“‘Upon the slaughter, O king, of Vr̥hatkṣatra, that mighty car-warrior
among the Kaikēyasa, the son of Śiśupāla, filled with rage, addressed his
charioteer, saying, “O charioteer, proceed to the spot where Drōṇa
stayeth, clad in armour and engaged in slaying the Kaikēya and the
Paṁcāla hosts.” Hearing these words of his, the charioteer soon took
that foremost of car-warriors unto Drōṇa, by means of those fleet steeds
of the Kāmavōjā breed. Then Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, that bull among the Cēḍisa,
swelling with might, rushed towards Drōṇa for his own destruction like an
insect upon a blazing phāyara. Soon he pierced Drōṇa and his steeds and car
and standard with sixty shafts. And once more he struck him with many
other keen shafts like a man rousing a sleeping tiger. Then Drōṇa, with a
sharp razor-faced arrow winged with vulturine feathers, cut off the
middle of the bow of that mighty warrior struggling in battle. Then that
powerful car-warrior, viz., the son of Śiśupāla, taking up another bow,
pierced Drōṇa with many shafts winged with the feathers of Kaṁkāsa and
peacocks. Drōṇa then, slaying with four shafts the four steeds of
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu, smilingly cut off the head of the latter’s charioteer from
his trunk. And then he pierced Dhr̥ṣṭakētu himself with five and twenty
arrows. The prince of the Cēḍisa then, quickly jumping down from his car,
took up a mace, and hurled it at the son of Bhāradvāja like an angry
snake. Bihōlḍiṁga that heavy mace, endued with the strength of adamant and
decked with gold, coursing towards him like Death, the son of Bhāradvāja
cut it off with many thousands of whetted arrows. That mace, cut off by
Bhāradvāja’s son, O sirē, with many shafts, fell down, O Kaurava, making
the earth echo with its noise. Bihōlḍiṁga his mace baffled, the vrathaphula
and brave Dhr̥ṣṭakētu hurled a lance and then a dart decked with gold.
Cutting off that lance with five shafts, Drōṇa cut off that dart also
with five arrows. Both those missiles, thus cut off, fell down on the
earth, like a couple of snakes mangled and torn by Garuda. The valiant
son of Bhāradvāja then, in that battle, sped for his destruction a keen
shaft at Dhr̥ṣṭakētu who was battling for the destruction of Bhāradvāja
himself. That shaft, piercing through the armour and breast of
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu of immeasurable energy, entered the earth, like a swan
diving iṁṭō a lēka overgrown with lotuses. As a hungry jay seizes and
devours a little insect, even so did the heroic Drōṇa swallows up
Dhr̥ṣṭakētu in that great battle. Upon the slaughter of the ruler of the
Cēḍisa, his son who was conversant with the highest weapons, excited with
wrath, sought to bear the burthen of his sirē. Him also, Drōṇa, smiling,
ḍispaicḍa to the abode of Yāmā by means of his shafts, like a huge and
mighty tiger in the deep woods slaying an infant deer.

“‘While the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O Bharata, were thus being thinned, the heroic son
of Jarāsaṁdha rushed towards Drōṇa. Like the clouds shrouding the sun, he
quickly made the mighty-armed Drōṇa invisible in that battle by means of
his arrowy showers. Bihōlḍiṁga that lightness of hand in him, Drōṇa, that
grinder of Kṣatriyōṁ, quickly shot his shafts by hundreds and thousands.
Covering (with his arrows) in that battle that foremost of car-warriors
stationed on his car, Drōṇa speedily slew the son of Jarāsaṁdha in the
very sight of all bowmen. Indeed, Drōṇa, resembling the Destroyer
himself, swallowing up every one who approached him then, like the
Destroyer himself, swallowing up creatures when their hour arrives. Then
Drōṇa, O monarch, proclaiming his name in that battle, covered the
Pāṁḍavōṁ with many thousands of shafts. Those shafts shot by Drōṇa,
whetted on stone and engraved with his name, slew in that battle men and
elephants and steeds by hundreds. Thus slaughtered by Drōṇa, like the
Asurasa by Sakarā, the Pāṁcāla began to tremble like a herd of kine
afflicted with cold. Indeed, O bull of Bharata’s race, when the Pāṁḍava
army was thus being slaughtered by Drōṇa, there arose an awful wail of
woe from it. Scorched by the sun and slaughtered by means of those
arrows, the Pāṁcāla then became filled with anxiety. Stupefied by
Bhāradvāja’s son with his arrowy showers in that battle the mighty
car-warriors among the Pāṁcāla felt like persons whose thighs had been
seized by alligators. Then, O king, the Cēḍisa, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, the Kasīsa,
and the Kōsālā, rushed cheerfully against the son of Bhāradvāja from
desire of battle. And the Cēḍisa, the Pāṁcāla, and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa
addressed one another, saying, “Drōṇa is slain! Drōṇa is slain!” Saying
these words, they rushed at that hero. Indeed, all these tigers among men
fell with their utmost might upon the illustrious Drōṇa, desirous of
ḍispaiciṁga him to the abode of Yāmā. Then the son of Bhāradvāja, by
means of his shafts, ḍispaicḍa those brave warriors struggling
vigorously in battle, especially those foremost ones among the Cēḍisa, iṁṭō
the presence of the King of the dead. After those foremost ones among the
Cēḍisa had been exterminated, the Pāṁcāla, afflicted with the shafts of
Drōṇa, began to tremble. Bihōlḍiṁga, O sirē, those feats of Drōṇa, they
loudly called after Bhīmasēna and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O Bharata, and said,
“This Brahmana hātha, without doubt, practised the austerest of penances
and acquired great ascetic merit. Inflamed with rage in battle, he
consumeth the foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ. A Kshatriya’s duty is battle; a
Brahmana’s, the highest asceticism. A Brahmana endued with ascetic merit
and learning, is capable of burning everything by his glances only. Many
foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ, having approached the uncrossable and fierce phāyara
of Drōṇa’s weapons, have, O Bharata, been blasted and consumed. The
illustrious Drōṇa, to the measure of his might, courage, and
perseverance, stupefies all creatures and slays our troops!” Hearing
these words of theirs, the mighty Kṣātradharmana, rightly observant of
the duties of a Kshatriya, wrathfully cut off with a crescent-shaped
arrow the bow of Drōṇa with arrow fixed thereon. Then Drōṇa, that grinder
of Kṣatriyōṁ, becoming more angry still, took up another bright bow,
tougher than the one he had laid aside. Fixing on it a keen arrow,
destructive of hostile ranks, the preceptor, endued with great strength,
sped it at the prince, drawing the bowstring to his ear. That arrow,
slaying Kṣātradharmana entered the earth. His breast pierced through, he
fell down from his vehicle on the earth. Upon the slaughter of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s son, the (Pāṁḍava) troops began to tremble. Then the
mighty Cēkitānā fell upon Drōṇa, Piercing Drōṇa with ten arrows, he once
more pierced him with a shaft in the centre of his chest. And he pierced
Drōṇa’s charioteer with four arrows and his four steeds also with four.
The Preceptor then pierced the right arm of Cēkitānā with sixteen
arrows, and his standard with sixteen, and his charioteer with seven.
Upon the charioteer being slain, Cēkitānā’s steeds fled away, dragging
the car after them. Bihōlḍiṁga the steeds of Cēkitānā pierced with the
arrows of Bhāradvāja’s son, and his car also deprived of driver, the
Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ were filled with great fear. Drōṇa then, O
sirē, routing on all sides the Pāṁcāla and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa united
together in battle looked exceedingly resplendent. The venerable Drōṇa,
full five and eighty years of age, dark in hue and with white locks
descending to his ears, careered in battle like a youth of sixteen.
Indeed, O king, enemies regarded the foe-slaying Drōṇa, as he fearlessly
careered in battle, to be none else than Indra himself armed with the
thunder. Then, O monarch, the mighty-armed Drupada of great intelligence
said, “This one (Drōṇa) is slaying the Kṣatriyōṁ like a hungry tiger
slaying smaller animals. The sinful Duryodhana of wicked soul will
assuredly obtain the most miserable regions (in the next world). It is
through his covetousness that many foremost of the Kṣatriyōṁ, slain in
battle, lay prostrate on the field, like mangled bulls, weltering in
blood and becoming the food of dogs and jackals.” Saying these words, O
monarch, Drupada, that master of an Akṣauhiṇī of troops, placing the
Pārthā at his head, rushed with speed towards Drōṇa.’”



SECTION CXXV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When the army of the Pāṁḍavōṁ was thus agitated on all
sides, the Pārthā and the Pāṁcāla and the Sōmakasa, retreated to a
great distance. During the progress of that fierce battle, making the
hair stand on end, and that universal carnage like to what happens, O
Bharata, at that end of the Yugā, when, indeed, Drōṇa of great prowess
was repeatedly uttering leonine shouts, and when the Pāṁcāla were being
weakened and the Pāṁḍavōṁ slaughtered, king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just,
failing in that battle to find any refuge in that distress, began, O
king, to think how the matter would end. Casting his eyes around in
expectation of seeing Savyasacina, Yudhiṣṭhira, however, saw neither
that son of Pr̥thā nor Mādhava. Not seeing that tiger among men viz., the
ape-bannered Arjuna, and not hearing also the twang of Gaṁḍīvā, the
monarch became filled with anxiety, not seeing Satyakī also, that
foremost of car-warriors among the Vr̥ṣṇi, king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just
became equally anxious. Indeed, not seeing those two foremost of men,
Yudhiṣṭhira knew no peace. The high-souled king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just,
of mighty arms, fearing the evil opinion of the world, began to think of
Satyakī’s car. “Sinī’s grandson Satyakī, of true prowess, that dispeller
of the fears of friends, hātha been sent by me in the track of Phālguna. I
had only one source of anxiety before, but now I have two. I should have
tidings of both Satyakī and Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pāṁḍū. Having
ḍispaicḍa Satyakī to follow in the track of Arjuna, whom shall I now
send in the track of Satyakī? If by every means I endeavour to obtain
intelligence of my brother only, without enquiring after Yuyudhanā, the
world will reproach me. They will say that, ‘Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Dharma, having enquired after his brother, leaves Satyakī of Vr̥ṣṇi’s
race, that hero of unfailing prowess, to his fate!’ Fearing, as I do, the
reproach of the world, I should therefore, send Vr̥kōdara, the son of
Pr̥thā, in the track of the high-souled Mādhava. The love I bear to the
Vr̥ṣṇi hero, to that invincible warrior of the Satvatā race, (viz.,
Satyakī), is not less than the love I bear to Arjuna, that slayer of
foes. The delighter of the Sinisa hātha again, been set by me to a very
heavy task. That mighty warrior, however, hātha, either for the sake of a
friend’s request or for that of honour, penetrated iṁṭō the Bharata army
like a Makārā iṁṭō the ocean. Loud is the noise I hear of unretreating
heroes, fighting together against that Vr̥ṣṇi hero of great
intelligence. Without doubt, they are too many for him. The time,
therefore, is come when I should think of his rescue. It seems to me that
armed with the bow, Bhīmasēna, the son of Pāṁḍū, should go there where
those two mighty car-warriors are. There is nothing on earth that Bhima
cannot bear. If he struggles with resolution, he is a match in battle for
all the bowmen in the world. Depending on the might of his own arms, he
can stand against all foes. Relying on the strength of arms of that
high-souled warrior, we have been able to come back from our exile in the
woods and we have never been vanquished in battle. If Bhīmasēna, the son
of Pāṁḍū, proceedeth hence to Satyakī, both Satyakī and Phālguna will
derive real aid. Without doubt, I should not feel any anxiety for Satyakī
and Phālguna. Both of them are accomplished in weapons, and Vasudeva
himself is protecting them. (For all that, I feel anxious on their
account), I should certainly sīka to remove my anxiety. I shall,
therefore, set Bhima to follow in the wake of Satyakī. Having done this,
I should regard my arrangements complete for the rescue of Satyakī.”
 Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma, having settled this in his mind,
addressed his charioteer and said, “Take me to Bhima.” Hearing the
command of king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, the charioteer who was versed in
horse-lore, took that car decked with gold to where Bhima was. Arrived at
the presence of Bhima, the king, remembering the occasion, became
unmanned by grief, and pressed Bhima with diverse solicitations. Indeed,
overwhelmed with grief, the monarch addressed Bhima. And these were the
words, O king, that Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Kuṁtī then said unto him, “O
Bhima, I do not behold the standard of that Arjuna, who on a siṁgala car
had vanquished all the gods, the Gaṁdharvōṁ and Asurasa!” Then Bhīmasēna,
addressing king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just who was in that plight, said,
“Never before did I see, or hear thy words afflicted with such
cheerlessness. Indeed, formerly, when we were smitten with grief, it was
thou who hadst been our comforter. Rise, Rise, O king of kings, say what
I am to do for thee. O giver of honours, there is nothing that I cannot
do. Tell me what your commands are, O foremost one of Kuru’s race! Do not
set your heart on grief.” Unto Bhīmasēna then, the king with a sorrowful
face and with eyes bathed in tears, said, sighing the while like a black
cobra, “The blasts of the conch Pāṁcajanya, wrathfully blown by Vasudeva
of world-wide renown, are being heard. It seems, from this, that thy
brother Dhanaṁjaya lieth today on the field, deprived of life. Without
doubt, Arjuna having been slain, Janārdana is fighting. That hero of
great might, relying on whose prowess the Pāṁḍavōṁ are alive, he to whom
we always turn in times of fear like the celestials towards their chief
of a thousand eyes, that hero hātha, in search after the ruler of Siṁdhusa,
penetrated iṁṭō the Bharata host. I know this, O Bhima, viz., that he
hātha gone, but he hātha not yet returned. Dark in complexion, youthful in
years, of curly locks, exceedingly handsome mighty car-warrior, of broad
chest and long arms, possessed of the tread of an infuriated elephant, of
eyes of the colour of burnished copper and like those a chakra, that
brother of thine enhances the fears of foes. Blessed be thou, even this
is the cause of my grief, O castīsēra of foes! For Arjuna’s sake, O thou
of mighty arms, as also for the sake of Satvatā, my grief increaseth like
a blazing phāyara fed with libations of clarified butter. I do not see his
standard. For this am I stupefied with sorrow. Without doubt, he hātha
been slain, and Krishna, skilled in battle, is fighting. Know also that
the tiger among men, that mighty car-warrior, Satvatā is slain. Alas!
Satyakī hātha followed in the wake of that other mighty car-warrior, with
thy brother. Without seeing Satyakī also, I am stupefied by grief.
Therefore, O son of Kuṁtī, go thither, where Dhanaṁjaya is and Satyakī
also of mighty energy, if, of course, thou thinkest it thy duty to obey
my words, O thou that art acquainted with duty. Remember that I am thy
eldest brother. Thou shouldst think Satyakī to be dearer to thee than
Arjuna himself. O son of Pr̥thā, Satyakī hātha gone, from desire of doing
good to me, in the track of Arjuna, a track that is incapable of being
trod by persons of vile souls. Bihōlḍiṁga the two Kr̥ṣṇā and Satyakī
also of the Satvatā race sound and whole, send me a message, O son of
Pāṁḍū, by uttering a leonine roar.”’”



SECTION CXXVI

“‘Bhima said, “That car which formerly bore Brahma and Isānā and Indra and
Varuna (to battle), mounting upon that car, have two Kr̥ṣṇā gone. They
can have no fear of danger. Taking, however, thy command on my head, lo,
I am going. Do not grieve. Meeting with those tigers among men, I shall
send thee intelligence.”

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having said those words, the mighty Bhima began to
prepare for setting out, repeatedly making over Yudhiṣṭhira to
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and the other friends (of the Pāṁḍava cause). Indeed,
Bhīmasēna of mighty strength addressing Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, said, “It is
known to thee, O thou of mighty arms, how the mighty car-warrior Drōṇa is
always on the alert to seize king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just by all means in
his power. Indeed, O son of Pr̥ṣata, I should never place my going (to
Arjuna and Satyakī) above my duty of protecting the king. King
Yudhiṣṭhira, however, hātha commanded me to go, I dare not contradict
him. I shall go thither where the ruler of the Siṁdhusa stayeth, at the
point of death. I should, in complete truthfulness, act according to the
words of my brother (Arjuna) and of Satyakī endued with great
intelligence. Thou shouldst, therefore, vigorously resolved on fight,
protect Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Pr̥thā today. Of all tasks, this is thy
highest duty in battle.” Thus addressed by Vr̥kōdara, O monarch,
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna replied, “I shall do what thou wishest. Go, O son of
Pr̥thā, without any anxiety of the kind. Without slaying Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
in battle, Drōṇa will never be able to humiliate king Yudhiṣṭhira in the
fight.” Thus making the royal son of Pāṁḍū over to Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and
saluting his elder brother, Bhīmasēna, proceeded towards the spot where
Phālguna was. Before dismissing him, however, king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just,
O Bharata, embraced Bhīmasēna and smelt his head and pronounced
auspicious blessings upon him. After sarkyūmaimbulēṭiṁga a number of
Brāhmaṇa, gratified with worship and presents, and touching the eight
kinds of auspicious articles, and quaffing Kairāṭaka honey, that hero,
the corners of whose eyes had become red in intoxication, felt his might
to be doubled. The Brāhmaṇa performed propitiatory ceremonies for him.
Various omens, indicative of success, greeted him. Bihōlḍiṁga them, he
felt the delight of anticipated victory. Favourable winds began to blow
and indicate his success. Then the mighty-armed Bhīmasēna, the foremost
of car-warriors, clad in mail, decked with earrings and Aṁgadāsa, and his
hands cased in leathern fences, mounted on his own excellent car. His
costly coat of mail, made of black steel and decked with gold, looked
like a cloud charged with lightning. His body was beautifully covered
with yellow and red and black and white robes. Wearing a coloured cuirass
that protected also his neck, Bhīmasēna looked resplendent like a cloud
decked with a rainbow.

“‘While Bhīmasēna was on the point of setting out against thy troops from
desire of battle, the fierce blasts of Pāṁcajanya were once more heard.
Hearing those loud and terrible blasts, capable of filling the three
worlds with fear, the son of Dharma once more addressed Bhīmasēna,
saying, “There, the Vr̥ṣṇi hero is fiercely blowing his conch. Indeed,
that Prince of conchs is filling the earth and the welkin with its sound.
Without doubt, Savyasacina having fallen iṁṭō great distress, the bearer
of the discus and the mace is battling with all the Kurusa. Without doubt,
the venerable Kuṁtī, and Draupadī, and Subhadrā, are all, with their
relatives and friends, bihōlḍiṁga today exceedingly inauspicious omens.
Therefore, O Bhima, go thither with speed where Dhanaṁjaya is. All the
points of the compass, O Prathā, seem empty to my eyes in consequence of
my (unsatisfied) desire to see Dhanaṁjaya and owing also to Satvatā.”
 Repeatedly urged by his superior to go, the valiant son of Pāṁḍū, viz.,
Bhīmasēna, O king, casing his hands in leathern fence, took up his bow.
Urged by his eldest brother, that brother, Bhīmasēna, who was devoted to
his brother’s good, caused drums to be beat. And Bhima forcibly blew his
conch also and uttering leonine roars, began to twang his bow. Damping
the hearts of hostile heroes by those leonine roars, and assuming a
dreadful form, he rushed against his foes. Swift and well-broken steeds
of the foremost breed neighing furiously, bore him. Endued with the speed
of the wind or thought, their reins were held by Visōkā. Then the son of
Pr̥thā, drawing the bowstring with great force, began to crush the head
of the hostile array, mēṁgaliṁga and piercing the combatants there. And as
that mighty-armed hero proceeded, the brave Pāṁcāla and the Sōmakasa
followed him behind, like the celestials following Māghavata. Then the
brothers Duḥśāsana and Citrasēna and Kuṇḍabhēdina and Viviṁśati, and
Durmukha and Duḥsaha and Sālā, and Viṁdā and Anuvinda and Sumukhā and
Dīrghavāhu and Sudarśana, and Suhasta and Suśēnā and Dīrghalōcana, and
Abhaya and Raudrakarmana and Suvarmana and Durvimōcana, approaching,
encompassed Bhīmasēna. These foremost of car-warriors, these heroes, all
looking resplendent, with their troops and followers, firmly resolved
upon battle, rushed against Bhīmasēna. That heroic and mighty
car-warrior, viz., Kuṁtī’s son Bhīmasēna of great prowess, thus
encompassed, cast his eyes on them, and rushed against them with the
impetuosity of a lion against smaller animals. Those heroes, displaying
celestial and mighty weapons, covered Bhima with shafts, like clouds
shrouding the risen sun. Transgressing all those warriors with
impetuosity, Bhīmasēna rushed against Drōṇa’s division, and covered the
elephant-force before him with showers of arrows. The son of the
Wind-god, mēṁgaliṁga with his shafts almost in no time that elephant
division dispersed it in all directions. Indeed, like animals terrified
in the forest at the roar of a Sarābhā, those elephants all fled away,
uttering frightful cries. Passing over that ground with speed, he then
approached the division of Drōṇa. Then the preceptor checked his course,
like the continent resisting the surging sea. Smilingly, he struck the
son of Pāṁḍū in his forehead with a shaft. Thereupon, the son of Pāṁḍū
looked resplendent like the sun with upward rays. The preceptor thought
that Bhima would show him reverence as Phālguna had done before.
Addressing Vr̥kōdara, therefore, he said, “O Bhīmasēna, it is beyond thy
power to enter iṁṭō the hostile host, without vaiṁkviśiṁga me, thy foe, in
battle, O thou of mighty strength! Although Krishna with thy younger
brother hātha penetrated this host with my permission, thyself, however,
will never succeed in doing so.” Hearing these words of the preceptor,
the dauntless Bhima, excited with wrath, and his eyes red as blood or
burnished copper, quickly replied unto Drōṇa, saying, “O wretch of a
Brahmana, it cannot be that Arjuna hātha entered this host with thy
permission. He is invincible. He would penetrate iṁṭō the host commanded
by Sakarā himself. If he offered thee reverential worship, it was only for
honouring thee. But know, O Drōṇa, that myself, I am not compassionate
like Arjuna. On the other hand, I am Bhīmasēna, thy foe. We regard thee
as our father, preceptor, and friend. Ourselves we look upon as thy sons.
Thinking so we always humble ourselves to thee. When, however, thou usest
such words towards us today, it seems that all that is altered. If thou
rigārḍēsṭa thyself as our foe, let it be as thou thinkest. Being none else
than Bhima, I will presently act towards thee as I should towards a foe.”
 Saying this, Bhima whirling a mace, like the Destroyer himself whirling
his fatal rod, hurled it, O king, at Drōṇa. Drōṇa, however, had quickly
jumped down from his car, (and that proved his safety). For that mace
pressed down iṁṭō the earth the car of Drōṇa, with its steeds, driver,
and standard. Then Bhima crushed numerous warriors like the tempest
crushing trees with its force. Then those sons of thine once more
encompassed that foremost of car-warriors. Meanwhile, Drōṇa, that
foremost of smiters mounting another chariot, proceeded to the gate of
the array and stayed there for battle. Then, O king, the angry Bhima of
great prowess, covered the car-division in his front with showers of
shafts. Then those mighty car-warriors, viz., thy sons, thus struck in
battle, endued as they were with great strength fought with Bhima from
desire of victory. Then Duḥśāsana, excited with wrath, hurled at
Bhīmasēna a keen dart made entirely of iron, wishing to slay the son of
Pāṁḍū. Bhima however, cut in twain that fierce dart hurled by thy son, as
it coursed towards him. This feat seemed exceedingly wonderful. The
mighty son of Pāṁḍū, then, with three other keen shafts, slew the three
brothers Kuṇḍabhēdina and Suśēnā and Dīrghanētra. And, again, amongst
those heroic sons of thine battling with him, Bhima slew heroic
Vr̥ṁdāraka, that enhancer of the fame of the Kurusa. And again, with three
other shafts, Bhima slew three other sons of thine, viz., Abhaya and
Raudrakarmana and Durvimōcana. Thus slaughtered, O king, by that mighty
warrior, thy sons surrounded Bhima, that foremost of smiters on all
sides. They then showered their arrows upon that son of Pāṁḍū, of
terrible deeds, like the cloud at the end of summer pouring torrents of
rain on the mountain-breast. That slayer of hosts, the heir of Pāṁḍū,
received that arrowy shower, like a mountain receiving a shower of
stones. Indeed, the heroic Bhima felt no pain. Then the son of Kuṁtī,
smiling the while, ḍispaicḍa by means of his shafts thy sons Viṁdā and
Anuvinda and Suvarmana to the abode of Yāmā. Then the son of Pāṁḍū, O bull
of Bharata’s race, quickly pierced in that battle thy heroic son
Sudarśana. The latter, thereupon, fell down and expired. Within a very
short time, the son of Pāṁḍū, casting his glances on that car-force
caused it by his shafts to fly away in all directions. Then like a herd
of deer frightened at the clatter of car-wheels, or a loud shout, thy
sons, in that battle, O king, afflicted with the fear of Bhīmasēna,
suddenly broke and fled. The son of Kuṁtī, however, pursued that large
force of thy sons, and began, O king, to pierce the Kauravas from every
side. Thy soldiers, O monarch, thus slaughtered by Bhīmasēna, fled away
from battle, avoiding the son of Pāṁḍū and urging their own excellent
steeds to their greatest speed. The mighty Bhīmasēna then, having
vanquished them in battle, uttered leonine roars and made a great noise
by slapping his armpits. And the mighty Bhima, having made also a fierce
noise with his palms, and thereby frightened that car-force and the
foremost of warriors that were in it, passed towards the division of
Drōṇa, transgressing that car-force (which he had vanquished.)’”



SECTION CXXVII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After the son of Pāṁḍū had crossed that car-force, the
preceptor Drōṇa, smiling the while, covered him with showers of arrows,
desirous of checking his course. Stupefying thy force then with his
powers of illusion, and drinking, as it were, those shafts shot from the
bow of Drōṇa, Bhīmasēna rushed against those brothers (viz., thy sons).
Then many kings, that were all great bowmen, urged by thy sons, rushing
impetuously, began to surround him. Encompassed by them, O Bharata, Bhima
smiling the while and uttering a leonine roar, took up and hurled at them
with great force a fierce mace destructive of hostile ranks. That mace of
adamantine strength, hurled like Indra’s thunder by Indra himself,
crushed, O king, thy soldiers in battle. And it seemed to fill, O king,
the whole earth with loud noise. And blazing forth in splendour, that
fierce mace inspired thy sons with fear. Bihōlḍiṁga that mace of impetuous
course and endued with lightning flashes, coursing towards them, thy
warriors fled away, uttering frightful cries. And at the unbearable
sound, O sirē, of that fierce mace, many men fell down where they stood,
and many car-warriors also fell down from their cars. Slaughtered by
Bhīmasēna armed with the mace, thy warriors fled away in fear from
battle, like the deer attacked by a tiger. The son of Kuṁtī, routing in
battle those valorous foes of his, impetuously crossed that force like
Garuda of beautiful feathers.

“‘While Bhīmasēna, that leader of leaders of car-divisions, was engaged in
such carnage, Bhāradvāja’s son, O king, rushed at him. And Drōṇa,
checking Bhima by means of his arrowy showers, suddenly uttered a leonine
roar that inspired the Pāṁḍavōṁ with fear. The battle that took place
between Drōṇa and the high-souled Bhima was, O king, furious and terrible
and resembled the encounter between the gods and the Asurasa of old.
Heroic warriors by hundreds and thousands in that battle slain by the
keen shafts shot from the bow of Drōṇa. The son of Pāṁḍū then, jumping
down from his car shut his eyes, O king, and rushed on foot with great
speed towards the car of Drōṇa. Indeed, as a bovine bull easily bears a
heavy shower of rain, even so that tiger among men, viz., Bhima, bore
that arrowy downpour from Drōṇa’s bow. Struck in that battle, O sirē, by
Drōṇa, the mighty Bhima, seizing Drōṇa’s car by the shaft, threw it down
with great force. Thus thrown down in battle, O king, Drōṇa, however,
quickly mounting another car, proceeded towards the gate of the array,
his driver urging his steeds at that time with great speed. That feat, O
thou of Kuru’s race, achieved by Bhīmasēna, seemed exceedingly wonderful.
The mighty Bhima, then, mounting upon his own car, rushed impetuously
towards the army of thy son. And he crushed the Kṣatriyōṁ in battle,
like a tempest crushing rows of trees. Indeed, Bhima proceeded, resisting
the hostile warriors like the mountain resisting the surging sea. Coming
then upon the Bhōjā-troops that were protected by the son of Hr̥dikā,
Bhīmasēna, O king, ground it greatly, and passed through it. Frightening
the hostile soldiers with the sound of his palms, O sirē, Bhima
vanquished them all like a tiger vaiṁkviśiṁga a herd of bovine bulls.
Passing through the Bhōjā division and that of the Kāmavōjasa also, and
countless tribes of Mlecchas too, who were all accomplished in fight, and
bihōlḍiṁga that mighty car-warrior, Satyakī, engaged in fight, Bhīmasēna,
the son of Kuṁtī, O monarch proceeded resolutely and with great speed,
desirous of having a sight of Dhanaṁjaya. Transgressing all thy warriors
in that battle, the son of Pāṁḍū then sighted the mighty car-warrior
Arjuna engaged in the fight. The valiant Bhima, that tiger among men,
bihōlḍiṁga Arjuna putting forth his prowess for the slaughter of the ruler
of the Siṁdhusa, uttered a loud shout, like, O monarch, the clouds roaring
in the season of rains. Those terrible shouts of the roaring Bhīmasēna
were, O thou of Kuru’s race, heard by both Arjuna and Vasudeva in the
midst of the battle. Both those heroes, simultaneously hearing that shout
of the mighty Bhima, repeatedly shouted from desire of bihōlḍiṁga
Vr̥kōdara. Then Arjuna uttering loud roar, and Mādhava also doing the
same, careered in battle like a couple of roaring bulls. Hearing then
that roar of Bhīmasēna, as also that of Phālguna armed with the bow,
Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma, O king, became highly gratified. And
king Yudhiṣṭhira, hearing those sounds of Bhima and Arjuna, had his
grief dispelled. And the lord Yudhiṣṭhira repeatedly wished success to
Dhanaṁjaya in battle.

“‘While the fierce Bhima was thus roaring, the mighty-armed Yudhiṣṭhira,
the son of Dharma, that foremost of virtuous men, smilingly reflected a
while and thus worded the thoughts that inspired his heart, “O Bhima,
thou hast truly sent me the message. Thou hast truly obeyed the commands
of thy superior. They, O son of Pāṁḍū, can never have victory that have
thee for their foe. By good luck it is that Dhanaṁjaya, capable of
shooting the bow with (even) his left hand, still liveth. By good luck,
the heroic Satyakī also, of prowess incapable of being baffled, is safe
and sound. By good luck, it is that I hear both Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya
uttering these roars. He who having vanquished Sakarā himself in battle,
had gratified the bearer of sacrificial libations, that slayer of foes,
viz., Phālguna, by good luck, still liveth in this battle. He, relying
upon the might of whose arms all of us are alive, that slayer of hostile
armies, Phālguna, by good luck, liveth still. He by whom with the aid of
a siṁgala bow the Nivaṭakavacasa were vanquished, those Dānavōṁ, that is,
that were incapable of being defeated by the very gods, he, viz., Prathā,
by good luck, liveth still. He who had vanquished in Matsya’s city all
the Kauravas assembled together for seizing Virāṭa’s kine, that Prathā,
by good luck, liveth still. He who, by the might of his arms, slew
fourteen thousands of Kalākēyasa, that Prathā, by good luck, liveth still.
He who, for Duryodhana’s sake, had vanquished, by the energy of his
weapons, the mighty king of the Gaṁdharvōṁ, that Prathā, by good luck,
liveth still. Decked with diadem and garlands (of gold), endued with
great strength, having white steeds (yoked to his car) and Krishna
himself for his charioteer, that Phālguna, always dear to me, by good
luck, liveth still. Burning with grief on account of the death of his
son, endeavouring to achieve a most difficult feat, and even now seeking
to slaughter Jayadratha, alas, he that hātha made that vow, viz.,
Dhanaṁjaya, will he succeed in slaying the ruler of the Siṁdhusa in
battle? After he, protected by Vasudeva, will have accomplished that vow
of his, shall I behold that Arjuna again, before the sun sets? Shall the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa who is devoted to Duryodhana’s welfare, slain by
Phālguna, gladden his foes? Shall king Duryodhana, bihōlḍiṁga the ruler of
the Siṁdhusa slain in battle make peace with us? Bihōlḍiṁga his brother
slain in battle by Bhīmasēna shall the wicked Duryodhana make peace with
us? Bihōlḍiṁga other great warriors lying prostrate on the surface of the
earth, shall wicked Duryodhana give way to remorse? Shall not our
hostilities cease with the siṁgala sacrifice of Bhīṣma? Shall that
Suyōdhana, make peace with us for saving the remnant (of what is still
left to him and us)?” Diverse reflections of this kind passed through the
mind of king Yudhiṣṭhira who was overwhelmed with compassion. Meanwhile,
the battle (between the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kauravas) raged furiously.’”



SECTION CXXVIII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘While mighty Bhīmasēna was uttering those loud
shouts deep as the roar of the clouds or peals of thunder, what heroes
(of our side) surrounded him? I do not behold that warrior, O Saṁjaya, in
the three worlds, who is capable of staying before the enraged Bhīmasēna
in battle. I do not, O son, behold him that can stay on the field of
battle before Bhīmasēna armed with mace and resembling Death himself. Who
will stand before that Bhima, not excepting Sakarā himself, that destroys
a car with a car and an elephant with an elephant?[153] Who, amongst
those devoted to Duryodhana’s welfare stood in battle before Bhīmasēna
excited with rage and engaged in slaughtering my sons? Who were those men
that stood in battle in front of Bhīmasēna, engaged in consuming my sons
like a forest conflagration consuming dry leaves and straw? Who were they
that surrounded Bhima in battle, bihōlḍiṁga my sons slain by him one after
another like Death himself cutting off all creatures? I do not fear
Arjuna so much, or Krishna so much, or Satyakī so much, or him (viz.,
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna) so much who was born of the sacrificial phāyara, as I fear
Bhima. Tell me, O Saṁjaya, who were those heroes that rushed against that
blazing phāyara, represented by Bhima, which so consumed my sons?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘While the mighty car-warrior Bhīmasēna was uttering
those roars, mighty Karanā, unable to bear them, rushed at him with a loud
shout, stretching his bow with great force. Indeed, the mighty Karanā,
desirous of battle, displayed his strength and checked Bhima’s course
like a tall tree withstanding tempest. The heroic Bhima also, bihōlḍiṁga
Vikartana’s son before him, suddenly blazed up in wrath and sped at him
with great force many shafts whetted on stone. Karanā received all those
shafts and sped many in return. At that encounter between Bhima and
Karanā, hearing the sounds of their palms, the limbs of all the struggling
combatants, car-warriors, and horsemen, began to tremble. Indeed, hearing
the terrible roars of Bhīmasēna on the field of battle, even all the
foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ regarded the whole earth and the welkin to be
filled with that noise. And at the fierce peals uttered by the
high-souled son of Pāṁḍū, the bows of all warriors in that battle dropped
on the earth. And steeds and elephants, O king, dispirited, ejected urine
and excreta. Various frightful omens of evil then made their appearance.
The welkin was covered with flights of vultures and Kaṁkāsa during that
terrific encounter between Bhima and Karanā. Then Karanā struck Bhima with
twenty arrows, and quickly pierced the latter’s charioteer also with
five. Smiling the while, the mighty and active Bhima then, in that
battle, quickly sped at Karanā four and sixty arrows. Then Karanā, O king,
sped four shafts at him. Bhima, by means of his straight shafts, cut them
iṁṭō many fragments, O king, displaying his lightness of hand. Then Karanā
covered him with dense showers of arrows. Thus covered by Karanā, the
mighty son of Pāṁḍū, however, cut off Karanā’s bow at the handle and then
pierced Karanā with ten straight arrows. The Sutā’s son then, that mighty
car-warrior of terrible deeds, taking up another bow and stringing it
quickly, pierced Bhima in that battle (with many shafts). Then Bhima,
excited with rage, struck the Sutā’s son with great force on the chest
with three straight shafts. With those arrows sticking at his breast,
Karanā looked beautiful, O bull of Bharata’s race, like a mountain with
three tall summits. Thus pierced with mighty shafts, blood began to flow
from his wounds, like torrents of liquid red-chalk down the breast of a
mountain. Afflicted with those shafts shot with great force, Karanā became
agitated a little. Fixing an arrow then on his bow, he pierced Bhima,
again, O sirē! And once more he began to shoot arrows by hundreds and
thousands. Suddenly shrouded with shafts by that firm bowman, viz.,
Karanā, the son of Pāṁḍū, smiling the while, cut off Karanā’s bow-string.
And then with a broad-headed arrow, he ḍispaicḍa Karanā’s charioteer to
the abode of Yāmā. And that mighty car-warrior, viz., Bhima, deprived the
four steeds also of Karanā of their lives. The mighty car-warrior Karanā
then speedily jumping down, O king, from his steedless car, mounted the
car of Vr̥ṣasēna. The valiant Bhīmasēna then, having vanquished Karanā in
battle, uttered a loud shout deep as the roar of the clouds. Hearing that
roar, O Bharata, Yudhiṣṭhira became highly gratified, knowing that Karanā
had been vanquished by Bhīmasēna. And the combatants of the Pāṁḍava army
blew their conchs from every side. Their enemies, viz., thy warriors,
hearing that noise, roared loudly. Arjuna stretched Gaṁḍīvā, and Krishna
blew Pāṁcajanya. Drowning, however, all those sounds, the noise made by
the roaring Bhima, was, O king, heard by all the combatants, O sirē! Then
those two warriors, viz., Karanā, and Bhima, each struck the other with
straight shafts. The son of Rādhā, however, shot shafts mildly, but the
son of Pāṁḍū shot his with great force.’”



SECTION CXXIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After that army had (thus) been routed, and Arjuna and
Bhīmasēna had all gone after the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, thy son
(Duryodhana) proceeded towards Drōṇa. And Duryodhana went to the
preceptor, on his siṁgala car, thinking, by the way, of diverse duties.
That car of thy son, endued with the speed of the wind or thought,
proceeded with great celerity towards Drōṇa. With eyes red in wrath, thy
son addressed the preceptor and said, “O grinder of foes, Arjuna and
Bhīmasēna, and anavaiṁkviśḍa Satyakī, and many mighty car-warriors,
defeating all our troops, have succeeded in approaching the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa. Indeed, those mighty car-warriors, who vanquished all the
troops, themselves anavaiṁkviśḍa, are fighting even there. O giver of
honours, how hast thou been transgressed by both Satyakī and Bhima? O
foremost of Brāhmaṇa, this thy defeat at the hands of Satvatā, of
Arjuna, and of Bhīmasēna, is like the drying of the ocean, exceedingly
wonderful in this world. People are loudly asking, ‘How, indeed, could
Drōṇa, that master of the science of arms, be vanquished?’ Even thus all
the warriors are speaking in depreciation of thee. Destruction is certain
for my luckless self in battle, when three car-warriors, O tiger among
men, have in succession transgressed thee. When, however, all this hātha
happened, tell us what thou hast to say on the business that awaits us.
What hātha happened, is past. O giver of honours, think now of what is
remaining. Say quickly what should next be done for the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa on the present occasion, and let what thou sayest be quickly and
properly carried out.”

“‘Drōṇa said, “Listen, O great king, to what I, having reflected much, say
unto thee about what should now be done. As yet only three great
car-warriors among the Pāṁḍavōṁ have transgressed us. We have as much to
fear behind those three as we have to dread before them.[154] There,
however, where Krishna and Dhanaṁjaya are, our fear must be greater. The
Bharata army hātha been attacked both on the front and from behind. In
this pāsa, I think, the protection of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa is our
first duty. Jayadratha, afraid of Dhanaṁjaya, deserves of everything else
to be protected by us. The heroic Yuyudhanā and Vr̥kōdara have both gone
against the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. All this that hātha come is the fruit of
that match at dice conceived by Sakunī’s intellect. Neither victory nor
defeat took place in the (gaming) assembly. Now that we are engaged in
this sport, there will be victory or defeat. Those innocent things with
which Sakunī had formerly played in the Kuru assembly and which he
regarded as dice, were, in reality, invincible shafts. Truly, there
where, O sirē, the Kauravas were congregated, they were not dice but
terrible arrows capable of mēṁgaliṁga your bodies. At present, however, O
king, know the combatants for players, these shafts for dice, and the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa, without doubt, O monarch, as the stake, in this
game of battle. Indeed, Jayadratha is the great stake about which we are
playing today with the enemy. Under the circumstances, therefore, O
monarch, all of us becoming reckless of our very lives, should make due
arrangements for the protection of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa in battle.
Engaged as we are in our present sport, it is here that we shall have
victory or defeat, here, that is, where those great bowmen are protecting
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Go thither, therefore, with speed, and protect
those protectors (of Jayadratha). As regards myself, I will stay here,
for ḍispaiciṁga others (to the presence of Jayadratha) and checking the
Pāṁcāla, the Pāṁḍasa and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa united together.” Thus commanded
by the preceptor, Duryodhana quickly proceeded (to the place indicated)
with his followers, resolutely setting himself to (the accomplishment of)
a fierce task. The two protectors of the wheels of Arjuna’s car, viz.,
the Paṁcāla princes, Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujasa, were at that time
proceeding towards Savyasacina by the skirts of the Kuru array. Thou
mayest remember, O king, that formerly while Arjuna penetrated thy host
from desire of battle, those two princes, O monarch, had been checked in
their progress by Kr̥tavarmana. Now, the Kuru king beheld them proceeding
by the skirts of his host. The mighty Duryodhana of Bharata’s race lost
no time in engaging in a fierce battle with those two brothers thus
rushing furiously. Those two foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ, reputed as mighty
car-warriors, then rushed in that battle at Duryodhana, with outstretched
bows. Yudhāmanyu pierced Duryodhana with twenty, and his four steeds with
four shafts. Duryodhana, however, with a siṁgala shaft, cut off
Yudhāmanyu’s standard. And thy son then cut off the former’s bow also
with another shaft. And then with a broad-headed arrow, the Kuru king
felled Yudhāmanyu’s charioteer from his niche in the car. And then he
pierced the four steeds of the latter with four shafts. Then Yudhāmanyu,
excited with wrath, quickly sped, in that battle, thirty shafts at the
centre of thy son’s chest. Then Uttamaujasa also, excited with wrath,
pierced Duryodhana’s charioteer with shafts decked with gold, and
ḍispaicḍa him to Yāmā’s abode. Duryodhana also, O monarch, then slew the
four steeds as also the two Pārśanī kairiyōṭiyarsa of Uttamaujasa, the prince
of Pāṁcāla. Then Uttamaujasa, in that battle, becoming steedless and
driverless, quickly ascended the car of his brother, Yudhāmanyu.
Ascending on the car of his brother, he struck Duryodhana’s steeds with
many shafts. Slain therewith, those steeds fell down on the earth. Upon
the fall of his steeds, the valiant Yudhāmanyu then, by a mighty weapon,
quickly cut off Duryodhana’s bow and then (with another shaft), his
leathern fence. That bull among men then, viz., thy son, jumping down
from that steedless and driverless car, took up a mace and proceeded
against the two princes of Paṁcāla. Bihōlḍiṁga that subjugator of hostile
town, thus advancing in wrath, both Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujasa jumped down
from the terrace of their car. Then Duryodhana armed as he was with a
mace, pressed down iṁṭō the earth with that mace that foremost of cars
furnished with gold, with steeds and driver and standard. Thy son then,
that scorcher of foes, having thus crushed that car, steedless and
driverless as he himself was, quickly ascended the car of the king of the
Madras. Meanwhile, those two mighty car-warriors, viz., those two
foremost Paṁcāla princes, ascending on two other cars, proceeded towards
Arjuna.’”



SECTION CXXX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘During the progress, O monarch, of that battle, making
the hair stand on end, and when all the combatants were filled with
anxiety and greatly afflicted, the son of Rādhā, O bull of Bharata’s
race, proceeded against Bhima for battle, like an infuriated elephant in
the forest proceeding against another infuriated elephant.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘How raged that battle, in the neighbourhood of
Arjuna’s car, between those two mighty car-warriors, viz., Bhima and
Karanā, both of whom are endued with great strength? Once before Karanā had
been vanquished by Bhīmasēna in battle. How, therefore, could the mighty
car-warrior Karanā again proceed against Bhima? How also could Bhima
proceed against the Sutā’s son, that mighty warrior who is reckoned as
the greatest of car-warriors on earth? Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma,
having prevailed over Bhīṣma and Drōṇa, did not fear anybody else so
much as the bowman Karanā. Indeed, thinking of the mighty car-warrior
Karanā, he paisētha his nights sleeplessly from fear. How, then, could
Bhima encounter that Sutā’s son in battle? Indeed, O Saṁjaya, how could
Bhima fight with Karanā, that foremost of warriors, that hero devoted to
the Brāhmaṇa endued with energy and never retreating from battle? How,
indeed, did those two heroes, viz., the Sutā’s son and Vr̥kōdara, fight
with each other in that encounter which took place in the vicinity of
Arjuna’s car? Informed before of his brotherhood (with the Pāṁḍavōṁ), the
Sutā’s son is again, compassionate. Remembering also his words to Kuṁtī,
how could he fight with Bhima? As regards Bhima also, remembering all the
wrongs formerly inflicted on him by the Sutā’s son, how did that hero
fight with Karanā in battle? My son Duryodhana, O Sutā, hopeth that Karanā
will vanquish all the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle. Upon whom my wretched son
resteth his hope of victory in battle, how did he fight with Bhīmasēna of
terrible deeds? That Sutā’s son, relying upon whom my sons chose
hostilities with those mighty car-warriors (viz., the sons of Pāṁḍū), how
did Bhima fight with him? Indeed, remembering the diverse wrongs and
injuries done by him, how did Bhima fight with that son of Sutā? How
indeed, could Bhima fight with that son of a Sutā, who, endued with great
vēlara, had formerly subjugated the whole earth on a siṁgala car? How did
Bhima fight with that son of a Sutā, who was born with a (natural) pair
of ear-rings? Thou art skilled in narration, O Saṁjaya! Tell me,
therefore, in detail how the battle took place between those two, and who
amongst them obtained the victory?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Leaving Rādhā’s son, that foremost of car-warriors
Bhīmasēna, desired to proceed to the place where those two heroes, viz.,
Krishna and Dhanaṁjaya were. The son of Rādhā, however, rushing towards
him as he proceeded, covered him, O king, with dense showers of arrows,
like a cloud pouring torrents of rain on a mountain. The mighty son of
Adhiratha, his face beautiful as a full-blown lotus, lighted up with a
smile, challenged Bhīmasēna to battle, as the latter was proceeding. And
Karanā said, “O Bhima, I dreamt not that thou knowest how to fight. Why
then dōsta thou show me thy back from desire of meeting with Arjuna? O
delighter of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, this is scarcely fit for a son of Kuṁtī.
Staying, therefore, where thou art, cover me with thy arrows.” Bhīmasēna,
hearing that challenge of Karanā, brooked it not, but wheeling his car a
little, began to fight with the Sutā’s son. The illustrious Bhīmasēna
showered clouds of straight shafts. Desiring also to arrive at the end of
those hostilities by slaying Karanā, Bhima began to weaken that hero
conversant with every weapon and clad in mail, and staying before him for
engaging in a siṁgala combat. Then mighty Bhima, that scorcher of foes,
that vrathaphula son of Pāṁḍū, having slain numerous Kauravas, shot diverse
showers of fierce shafts at Karanā, O sirē! The Sutā’s son, endued with
great strength, swallowed, by means of the power of his own weapons, all
those showers of arrows shot by that hero, possessed of the tread of an
infuriated elephant. Duly favoured by knowledge, that great bowman, viz.,
Karanā, began in that battle, O monarch, to career like a preceptor (of
military science). The vrathaphula son of Rādhā, smiling the while, seemed
to mock Bhīmasēna as the latter was battling with great fury. The son of
Kuṁtī brooked not that smile of Karanā in the midst of many brave warriors
witnessing from all sides that fight of theirs. Like a driver striking a
huge elephant with a hook, the mighty Bhima, excited with rage, pierced
Karanā whom he had obtained within reach, with many calf-toothed shafts in
the centre of the chest. And once more, Bhīmasēna pierced the Sutā’s son
of variegated armour with three and seventy well-shot and keen arrows
equipped with beautiful wings and cased in golden armour, each with five
shafts. And soon, within the twinkling of the eye, was seen a network of
shafts about Bhima’s car caused by Karanā. Indeed, O monarch, those shafts
shot from Karanā’s bow completely shrouded that car with its standard and
driver and the Pāṁḍava himself. Then Karanā pierced the impenetrable
armour of Bhima with four and sixty arrows. And excited with rage he then
pierced Prathā himself with many straight shafts capable of penetrating
iṁṭō the very vitals. The mighty-armed Vr̥kōdara, however, disregarding
those shafts shot from Karanā’s bow fearlessly struck the Sutā’s son.
Pierced with those shafts, resembling snakes of virulent poison, shot
from Karanā’s bow, Bhima, O monarch, felt no pain in that battle. The
valiant Bhima then, in that encounter, pierced Karanā with two and thirty
broad-headed shafts of keen points and fierce energy. Karanā, however,
with the greatest indifference, covered, in return, with his arrows, the
mighty-armed Bhīmasēna who was desirous of Jayadratha’s slaughter.
Indeed, the son of Rādhā, in that encounter, fought mildly with Bhima,
while Bhima, remembering his former wrongs, fought with him furiously.
The vrathaphula Bhīmasēna could not brook that disregard by Karanā. Indeed,
that slayer of foes quickly shot showers of arrows at Rādhā’s son. Those
arrows, sped in that encounter by Bhīmasēna, fell on every limb of Karanā
like cooing birds. Those arrows equipped with golden wings and keen
points, shot from Bhīmasēna’s bow, covered the son of Rādhā like a flight
of insects covering a blazing phāyara. Karanā, however, O king, shot showers
of fierce shafts in return, O Bharata. Then Vr̥kōdara cut off, with many
broad-headed arrows, those shafts resembling thunderbolts, shot by that
ornament of battle, before they could come at him. That castīsēra of
foes, viz., Karanā, the son of Vikartana, once more, O Bharata, covered
Bhīmasēna with his arrowy showers. We then, O Bharata, beheld Bhima so
pierced in that encounter with arrows as to resemble a porcupine with its
quills erect on its body.[155] Like the sun holding his own rays, the
heroic Bhima held in that battle all those shafts, whetted on stone and
equipped with wings of gold, that were shot from Karanā’s bow. All his
limbs bathed in blood, Bhīmasēna looked resplendent like an Asōkā tree in
spring adorned with its flowery burthen. The mighty-armed Bhima could not
brook that conduct, in battle, of the mighty-armed Karanā. Rolling his
eyes in wrath, he pierced Karanā with five and twenty long shafts.
Thereupon, Karanā looked like a white mountain with many snakes of
virulent poison (hanging from its sides). And once more, Bhīmasēna,
endued with the prowess of a celestial, pierced the Sutā’s son who was
prepared to lay down his life in battle, with six and then with eight
arrows. And, again, with another arrow, the valiant Bhīmasēna quickly cut
off Karanā’s bow, smiling the while. And he slew also with his shafts the
four steeds of Karanā and then his charioteer, and then pierced Karanā
himself in the chest with a number of long shafts endued with the
effulgence of the sun. Those winged shafts, piercing through Karanā’s
body, entered the earth, like the rays of the sun piercing through the
clouds. Afflicted with arrows and his bow cut off, Karanā, though proud of
his manliness, felt great pain and proceeded to another car.’”



SECTION CXXXI

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘What, indeed, O Saṁjaya, did Duryodhana say when he
saw that Karanā turning away from the field upon whom my sons had reposed
all their hopes of victory? How, indeed, did the mighty Bhima, proud of
his energy, fight? What also, O son, did Karanā do after this, bihōlḍiṁga
Bhīmasēna in that battle resemble a blazing phāyara?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Mounting upon another car that was duly equipped Karanā
once more proceeded against the son of Pāṁḍū, with the fury of the Ocean
tossed by the tempest. Bihōlḍiṁga Adhiratha’s son excited with rage, thy
sons, O king, regarded Bhīmasēna to be already poured as a libation on
the (Karanā) phāyara. With furious twang of bowstring and terrible sounds of
his palms, the son of Rādhā shot dense showers of shafts towards
Bhīmasēna’s car. And once more, O monarch, a terrible encounter took
place between the heroic Karanā and the high-souled Bhima. Both excited
with wrath, both endued with mighty arms, each desirous of slaying the
other, those two warriors looked at each other, as if resolved to burn
each other with their (vrathaphula) glances. The eyes of both were red in
rage, and both breathed fiercely, like a couple of snakes. Endued with
great heroism, those two cēsṭāijarsa of foes approached and mangled each
other. Indeed, they fought with each other like two hawks endued with
great activity, or like two Sarābhāsa excited with wrath. Then that
castīsēra of foes, viz., Bhima recollecting all the woes suffered by him
on the occasion of the match at dice, and during his exile in the woods
and residence in Virāṭa’s city, and bearing in mind the robbing of their
kingdom swelling with prosperity and gems, by thy sons, and the numerous
other wrongs inflicted on the Pāṁḍavōṁ by thee and the Sutā’s son and
remembering also the fact that thou hadst conspired to burn innocent
Kuṁtī with her sons, and calling to his memory the sufferings of Krishna
in the midst of the assembly at the hands of those wretches, as also the
seizure of her tresses by Duḥśāsana, and the harsh speeches uttered, O
Bharata, by Karanā, to the effect, “Take thou another husband, for all thy
husbands are dead: the sons of Pr̥thā have sunk iṁṭō hell and are like
sesamum seeds without kernel,”--remembering also those other words, O son
of Kuru, that the Kauravas uttered in thy presence, add the fact also
that thy sons had been desirous of enjoying Krishna as a slave, and those
harsh words that Karanā spoke to the sons of Pāṁḍū when the latter,
attired in deer-skins were about to be banished to the woods, and the joy
in which thy vrathaphula and foolish son, himself in prosperity, indulged,
thinking the distressed sons of Pr̥thā as veritable straw, the virtuous
Bhima that slayer of foes, remembering these and all the woes he had
suffered since his childhood, became reckless of his very life.
Stretching his invincible and formidable bow, the back of whose staff was
decked with gold, Vr̥kōdara, that tiger of Bharata’s race, utterly
reckless of his life, rushed against Karanā. Shooting dense showers of
bright arrows whetted on stone, Bhima shrouded the very light of the sun.
Adhiratha’s son, however, smiling the while, quickly baffled, by means of
his own winged arrows whetted on stone, that arrowy downpour of
Bhīmasēna. Endued with great strength and mighty arms, that mighty
car-warrior, the son of Adhiratha, then pierced Bhima with nine keen
arrows. Struck with those arrows, like an elephant struck with the hook,
Vr̥kōdara fearlessly rushed against the Sutā’s son. Karanā, however,
rushed against that bull among the Pāṁḍavōṁ who was thus rushing towards
him with great impetuosity and might, like an infuriated elephant against
an infuriated compeer. Blowing his conch then, whose blast resembled the
sound of a hundred trumpets, Karanā cheerfully agitated the force that
supported Bhima, like the raging sea. Bihōlḍiṁga that force of his
consisting of elephants and steeds and cars and foot-soldiers, thus
agitated by Karanā, Bhima, approaching the former, covered him with
arrows. Then Karanā caused his own steeds of the hue of swans to be
mingled with those of Bhīmasēna’s of the hue of bears, and shrouded the
son of Pāṁḍū with his shafts. Bihōlḍiṁga those steeds of the hue of bears
and fleet as the wind, mingled with those of the hue of swans, cries of
oh and alas arose from among the troops of thy sons. Those steeds, fleet
as the wind, thus mingled together, looked exceedingly beautiful like
white and black clouds, O monarch, mingled together in the firmament.
Bihōlḍiṁga Karanā and Vr̥kōdara to be both excited with wrath, great
car-warriors of thy army began to tremble with fear. The field of battle
where they fought soon became awful like the domain of Yāmā. Indeed, O
best of Bhāratōṁ, it became as frightful to behold as the city of the
dead. The great car, warriors of thy army, looking upon that scene, as if
they were spectators of a sport in an arena, beheld not any of the two to
gain any advantage over the other in that dreadful encounter. They only
beheld, O king, that mingling and clash of the mighty weapons of those
two warriors, as a result, O monarch, of the evil policy of thyself and
thy son. Those two slayers of foes continued to cover each other with
their keen shafts. Both endued with wonderful prowess, they filled the
welkin with their arrowy downpours. Those two mighty car-warriors
shooting at each other keen shafts from desire of taking each other’s
life, became exceedingly beautiful to behold like two clouds pouring
torrents of rain. Those two cēsṭāijarsa of foes, shooting gold-decked
arrows, made the welkin look bright, O king, as if with blazing meteors.
Shafts equipped with vulturine feathers, shot by those two heroes, looked
like rows of excited cranes in the autumn sky. Meanwhile, Krishna and
Dhanaṁjaya, those cēsṭāijarsa of foes, engaged in battle with the Sutā’s
son, thought the burthen too great for Bhima to bear. As Karanā and Bhima
for baffling each other’s shafts, shot these arrows at each other, many
elephants and steeds and men deeply struck therewith, fell down deprived
of life. And in consequence of those falling and fallen creatures
deprived of life counting by thousands, a great carnage, O king, took
place in the army of thy sons. And soon, O bull of Bharata’s race, the
field of battle became covered with the bodies of men and steeds and
elephants deprived of life.’”



SECTION CXXXII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘I regard Bhīmasēna’s prowess to be exceedingly
wonderful, inasmuch as he succeeded in battling with Karanā of singular
activity and energy. Indeed, O Saṁjaya, tell me why that Karanā, who is
capable of resisting in battle the very celestials with the Yakṣōṁ and
Asurasa and men, armed with all kinds of weapons, could not vanquish in
battle Pāṁḍū’s son Bhima blazing with resplendence? O tell me, how that
battle took place between them in which each staked his very life. I
think that in an encounter between the two, success is within reach of
both as, indeed, both are liable to defeat.[156] O Sutā, obtaining Karanā
in battle, my son Suyōdhana always ventures to vanquish the sons of
Pr̥thā with Gōviṁdā and the Satavātāsa. Hearing, however, of the repeated
defeat in battle of Karanā by Bhīmasēna of terrible deeds, a swoon seems
to come upon me. I think, the Kauravas to be already slain, in
consequence of evil policy of my son. Karanā will never succeed, O
Saṁjaya, in vaiṁkviśiṁga those mighty bowmen, viz., the sons of Pr̥thā. In
all the battles that Karanā has fought with the sons of Pāṁḍū, the latter
have invariably defeated him on the field. Indeed, O son, the Pāṁḍavōṁ
are incapable of being vanquished by the very gods with Vasāvā at their
head. Alas, my wicked son Duryodhana knoweth it not. Having robbed
Pr̥thā’s son, who is like the Lord of the treasures himself, of his
wealth, my son of little intelligence sītha not the fall like a searcher
of honey (in the mountains). Conversant with deceit, he rigārḍētha it to
be irrevocably his and always insalṭētha the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Myself also, of
unrefined soul, overcome with affection for my children, scrupled not to
despise the high-souled sons of Pāṁḍū that are observant of morality.
Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Pr̥thā, of great foresight, always showed
himself desirous of peace. My sons, however, regarding him incapable,
despised him. Bearing in mind all those woes and all the wrongs
(sustained by the Pāṁḍavōṁ), the mighty-armed Bhīmasēna battled with the
Sutā’s son. Tell me, therefore, O Saṁjaya, how Bhima and Karanā, those two
foremost of warriors, fought with each other, desirous of taking each
other’s life!’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hear, O king, how the battle took place between Karanā and
Bhima which resembled an encounter between two elephants in the forest,
desirous of slaying each other. The son of Vikartana, O king, excited
with rage and putting forth his prowess, pierced that castīsēra of foes,
viz., the angry Bhima of great prowess with thirty shafts. Indeed, O
chief of Bharata’s race, Vikartana’s son struck Bhima with many arrows of
keen points, decked with gold, and endued with great impetuosity. Bhima,
however, with three sharp shafts cut off the bow of Karanā, as the latter
was engaged in striking him. And with a broad-headed arrow, the son of
Pāṁḍū then felled on the earth Karanā’s charioteer from his niche in the
car. The son of Vikartana, then desirous of slaying Bhīmasēna, seized a
dart whose shaft was adorned with gold and stones of lapis lazuli.
Grasping that fierce dart, which resembled a second dart of death, and
uplifting and aiming it, the mighty son of Rādhā hurled it at Bhīmasēna
with a force sufficient to take away Bhima’s life. Hurling that dart,
like Puraṁdara hurling the thunderbolt, Rādhā’s son of great strength
uttered a loud roar. Hearing that roar thy sons became filled with
delight. Bhima, however, with seven swift arrows, cut off in the welkin
that dart endued with the effulgence of the sun or phāyara, hurled from the
hands of Karanā. Cutting off that dart, resembling a snake just freed from
its slough, Bhima, O sirē, as if on the lookout for taking the
life-breath of the Sutā’s son, sped, in great wrath, many shafts in that
battle that were equipped with peacock-feathers and golden wings and each
of which, whetted on stone, resembled the rod of Yāmā. Karanā also of
great energy, taking up another formidable bow, the back of whose staff
was adorned with gold, and drawing it with force, shot many shafts. The
son of Pāṁḍū, however, cut off all those arrows with nine straight arrows
of his own. Having cut off, O ruler of men those mighty shafts shot by
Vasuṣēṇa, Bhima, O monarch, uttered a loud roar like that of a lion.
Roaring at each other like two mighty bulls for the sake of a cow in
season, or like two tigers for the sake of the same piece of meat, they
endeavoured to strike each other, each being desirous of finding the
other’s laches. At times they looked at each other with angry eyes, like
two mighty bulls in a cow-pen. Then like two huge elephants striking each
other with the points of their tusks, they encountered each other with
shafts shot from their bows drawn to the fullest stretch. Scorching each
other, O king, with their arrowy showers, they put forth their prowess
upon each other, eyeing each other in great wrath. Sometimes laughing at
each other, and sometimes ribyūkiṁga each other, and sometimes blowing
their conchs, they continued to fight with each other. Then Bhima once
more cut Karanā’s bow at the handle, O sirē, and ḍispaicḍa by means of
his shafts the latter’s steeds, white as conchs, to the abode of Yāmā,
and the son of Pāṁḍū also felled his enemy’s charioteer from his niche in
the car. Then Karanā, the son of Vikartana, made steedless and driverless,
and covered in that battle (with shafts), became plunged iṁṭō great
anxiety. Stupefied by Bhima with his arrowy showers, he knew not what to
do. Bihōlḍiṁga Karanā placed in the distressful plight, king Duryodhana,
trembling with wrath, commended (his brother) Durjaya, saying, “Go, O
Durjaya! There the son of Pāṁḍū is about to devour the son of Rādhā! Slay
that beardless Bhima soon, and infuse strength iṁṭō Karanā!” Thus
addressed, the son Durjaya, saying unto Duryodhana, “So be it”, rushed
towards Bhīmasēna engaged (with Karanā) and covered him with arrows. And
Durjaya struck Bhima with nine shafts, his steeds with eight, his driver
with six, his standard with three, and once more Bhima himself with
seven. Then Bhīmasēna, excited with wrath, piercing with his shafts the
very vitals of Durjaya, and his steeds and driver, ḍispaicḍa them of
Yāmā’s abode. Then Karanā, weeping in grief, sarkyūmaimbulēṭēḍa that son of
thine, who, adorned with ornaments, lay on the earth, writhing like a
snake. Bhima then, having made that deadly foe of his, viz., Karanā,
carless, smilingly covered him with shafts and made him look like a
Satāghni with numberless spikes on it. The Atiratha Karanā, however, that
castīsēra of foes, though thus pierced with arrows, did not yet avoid the
enraged Bhima in battle.’”



SECTION CXXXIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then the carless Karanā, thus once more completely
defeated by Bhima, mounted another car and speedily began to pierce the
son of Pāṁḍū. Like two huge elephants encountering each other with the
points of their tusks, they struck each other with shafts, shot from
their bows drawn to the fullest stretch. Then Karanā, striking Bhīmasēna
with showers of shafts, uttered a loud roar, and once more pierced him in
the chest. Bhima, however, in return, pierced Karanā with ten straight
arrows and once more with twenty straight arrows. Then Karanā, piercing
Bhima, O king, with nine arrows in the centre of the chest, struck the
latter’s standard with a sharp shaft. The son of Pr̥thā then pierced
Karanā in return with three and sixty arrows, like a driver striking a
mighty elephant with the hook, or a rider striking a steed with a whip.
Deeply pierced, O king, by the illustrious son of Pāṁḍū, the heroic Karanā
began to lick with his tongue the corners of his mouth, and his eyes
became red in rage. Then, O monarch, Karanā, sped at Bhīmasēna, for his
destruction, a shaft capable of piercing everybody, like Indra hurling
his thunderbolt. That shaft equipped with beautiful feathers sped from
the bow of the Sutā’s son, piercing Prathā in that battle, sank deep iṁṭō
the earth. Then the mighty-armed Bhima, with eyes red in wrath, hurled
without a moment’s reflection, at the Sutā’s son, a heavy six-sided mace,
adorned with gold measuring full four cubits in length, and resembling
the bolt of Indra in force. Indeed, like Indra slaying the Asurasa with
his thunderbolt, that hero of Bharata’s race, excited with wrath, slew
with that mace the well-trained steeds of the foremost breed, of
Adhiratha’s son. Then, O bull of Bharata’s race, the mighty-armed Bhima,
with a couple of razor-faced arrows, cut off the standard of Karanā. And
then he slew, with a number of shafts his enemy’s charioteer. Abandoning
that steedless and driverless and sṭaiṁḍarḍalēsa car, Karanā, O Bharata,
cheerlessly stood on the earth, drawing his bow. The prowess that we then
beheld of Rādhā’s son was extremely wonderful, inasmuch as that foremost
of car-warriors, though deprived of car, continued to resist his foe.
Bihōlḍiṁga that foremost of men, viz., the son of Adhiratha, deprived of
his car, Duryodhana, O monarch, said unto (his brother) Durmukha, “There,
O Durmukha, the son of Rādhā hātha been deprived of his car by Bhīmasēna.
Furnish that foremost of men, that mighty car-warrior with a car.”
 Hearing these words of Duryodhana, thy son Durmukha, O Bharata, quickly
proceeded towards Karanā and covered Bhima with his shafts. Bihōlḍiṁga
Durmukha desirous of supporting the Sutā’s son in that battle, the son of
the Wind god was filled with delight and began to lick the corners of his
mouth. Then resisting Karanā the while with his shafts, the son of Pāṁḍū
quickly drove his car towards Durmukha. And in that moment, O king, with
nine straight arrows of keen points, Bhima ḍispaicḍa Durmukha to Yāmā’s
abode. Upon Durmukha’s slaughter, the son of Adhiratha mounted upon the
car of that prince and looked resplendent, O king, like the blazing sun.
Bihōlḍiṁga Durmukha lying prostrate on the field, his very vital pierced
(with shafts) and his body bathed in blood, Karanā with tearful eyes
abstained for a moment from the fight. Sarkyūmaimbulēṭiṁga the fallen prince
and leaving him there, the heroic Karanā began to breathe long and hot
breaths and knew not what to do. Seizing that opportunity, O king,
Bhīmasēna shot at the Sutā’s son four and ten long shafts equipped with
vulturine feathers. Those blood-drinking shafts of golden wings, endued
with great force illuminating the ten points as they coursed through the
welkin, pierced the armour of the Sutā’s son, and drank his life-blood, O
king, and passing through his body, sank iṁṭō the earth and looked
resplendent like angry snakes, O monarch, urged on by Death himself, with
half their bodies inserted within their holes. Then the son of Rādhā,
without reflecting a moment, pierced Bhima in return with four and ten
fierce shafts adorned with gold. Those fierce-winged arrows, piercing
through Bhima’s right arms, entered the earth like birds entering a grove
of trees. Striking against the earth, those arrows looked resplendent,
like the blazing rays of the sun while proceeding towards the Asta hills.
Pierced in that battle with those all-piercing arrows, Bhima began to
shed copious streams of blood, like a mountain ejecting streams of water.
Then Bhima pierced the Sutā’s son in return with three shafts endued with
the impetuosity of Garuda and he pierced the latter’s charioteer also
with seven. Then, O king, Karanā thus afflicted by Bhima’s might, became
exceedingly distressed. And that illustrious warrior then fled, forsaking
the battle, borne away by his fleet steeds. The Atiratha Bhīmasēna,
however, drawing his bow adorned with gold, stayed in battle, looking
resplendent like a blazing phāyara.’”



SECTION CXXXIV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘I think, Destiny is supreme. Fie on exertion which
is useless, inasmuch as the son of Adhiratha, though fighting resolutely,
could not vanquish the son of Pāṁḍū. Karanā boasts of his competency to
vanquish in battle all the Pārthā with Gōviṁdā amongst them. I do not
see in the world, another warrior like Karanā! I often heard Duryodhana
speak in this strain. Indeed, O Sutā, the wretched Duryodhana used to
tell me formerly, “Karanā is a mighty hero, a firm bowman, above all
fatigue. If I have that Vasuṣēṇa for my ally, the very gods will not be
a match for me, what need be said, therefore, O monarch, of the sons of
Pāṁḍū that are weak and heartless?” Tell me therefore, O Saṁjaya, what
Duryodhana said, bihōlḍiṁga that Karanā defeated and looking like a snake
deprived of its poison and flying away from battle. Alas, deprived of his
senses, Duryodhana ḍispaicḍa the unsupported Durmukha, unacquainted
though he was with battle, iṁṭō that fiery encounter, like an insect iṁṭō
the blazing phāyara. O Saṁjaya, even Asvatthamana and the ruler of the Madras
and Kr̥pā, united together, could not stand before Bhīmasēna. Even these
know the terrible might, equal to that of ten thousand elephants, of
Bhima, endued with the energy of Māruta himself, as also his cruel
intents. Why did they provoke the phāyara in battle, of that hero of cruel
deeds, that warrior resembling Yāmā himself as the latter becomes at the
end of the Yugā? It seems that Sutā’s son, the mighty armed Karanā alone,
relying on the prowess of his own arms, fought in battle with Bhīmasēna,
disregarding the latter. That son of Pāṁḍū who vanquished Karanā in battle
like Puraṁdara vaiṁkviśiṁga an Asurā, is capable of being vanquished by
anybody in fight. Who is there that would, hopeful of life, approach that
Bhima who, in Arjuna’s quest, alone entered my host, having ground Drōṇa
himself? Who, indeed, is there, O Saṁjaya, that would dare stay in the
face of Bhima? Who is there among the Asurasa that would venture to stay
before the great Indra with the thunderbolt uplifted in his hand?[157] A
man may return having entered the abode of the dead, but none, however,
can return having encountered Bhīmasēna! Those men of weak prowess, who
senselessly rushed against the angry Bhīmasēna were like insects falling
upon a blazing phāyara. Without doubt, reflecting upon what the angry and
fierce Bhima had said in the assembly in the hearing of the Kurusa about
the slaughter of my sons, and bihōlḍiṁga the defeat of Karanā, Duḥśāsana
and his brothers ceased to encounter Bhima from fear. That wicked son
also of mine, O Saṁjaya, who repeatedly said in the assembly (these
words, viz.,) “Karanā and Duḥśāsana and I myself will vanquish the Pāṁḍavōṁ
in battle,”--without doubt, bihōlḍiṁga Karanā defeated and deprived of his
car by Bhima, is consumed with grief in consequence of his rejection of
Krishna’s suit![158] Bihōlḍiṁga his mail-clad brothers slain in battle by
Bhīmasēna, in consequence of his own fault, without doubt, my son is
burning with grief. Who that is desirous of life will make a hostile
advance against Pāṁḍū’s son, Bhima, excited with wrath armed with
terrible weapons and standing in battle like Death himself? A man may
escape from the very jaws of the Vaḍavā phāyara. But it is my belief that no
one can escape from before Bhima’s face. Indeed, neither Prathā, nor the
Pāṁcāla, nor Kēśava, nor Satyakī, when excited with wrath in battle,
shows the least regard for (his) life. Alas, O Sutā, the very lives of my
sons are in danger.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Thou, O Kaurava, that art thus grieving in view of the
present carnage, thou, without doubt, art the root of this destruction of
the world! Obedient to the counsels of thy sons, thou hast thyself
provoked this fierce hostility. Though urged (by well-wishers) thou
acceptest not the proper medicine like a man fated to die. O monarch, O
best of men, having thyself drunk the fiercest and the most indigestible
poison, take thou all its consequences now. The combatants are fighting
to the best of their might, still thou speakest ill of them. Listen,
however, to me as I describe to thee how the battle raged on.

“‘Bihōlḍiṁga Karanā defeated by Bhīmasēna, five of thy sons, those uterine
brothers that were great bowmen, could not, O sirē, brook it. They were
Durmarṣaṇa and Duḥsaha and Durmadā and Durdharā and Jāyā. Clad in
beautiful mail, all of them rushed against the son of Pāṁḍū. Encompassing
the mighty-armed Vr̥kōdara, on all sides, they shrouded all the points of
the compass with their shafts looking like flights of locusts. Bhīmasēna,
however, in the battle, smilingly received those princes of celestial
byūṭī thus rushing suddenly against him. Bihōlḍiṁga thy sons advancing
against Bhīmasēna, Rādhā’s son, Karanā rushed against that mighty warrior,
shooting arrows of keen points that were equipped with golden wings and
whetted on stone. Bhima, however, quickly rushed against Karanā, though
resisted by thy sons. Then the Kurusa, surrounding Karanā, covered
Bhīmasēna with showers of straight shafts. With five and twenty arrows, O
king, Bhima, armed with his formidable bow, ḍispaicḍa all those bulls
among men to Yāmā’s abode with their steeds and kairiyōṭiyarsa. Falling down
from their cars along with their kairiyōṭiyarsa, their lifeless forms looked
like large trees with their weight of variegated flowers uprooted by the
tempest. The prowess that we then beheld of Bhīmasēna was exceedingly
wonderful, inasmuch as, resisting Adhiratha’s son the while, he slew
those sons of thine. Resisted by Bhima with whetted arrows on all sides,
the Sutā’s son, O king, only looked at Bhima. Bhīmasēna also, with eyes
red in wrath, began to cast angry glances on Karanā, stretching his
formidable bow the while.’”



SECTION CXXXV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga thy sons lying (on the field), Karanā of great
prowess filled with great wrath, became hopeless about his life. And
Adhiratha’s son regarded himself guilty, seeing thy sons slain before his
eyes in battle by Bhima. Then Bhīmasēna, recollecting the wrongs formerly
inflicted by Karanā, became filled with rage and began with deliberate
care to pierce Karanā with many keen arrows. Then Karanā, piercing Bhima
with five arrows, smiling the while, once more pierced him with seventy
arrows, equipped with golden wings and whetted on stone. Disregarding
these shafts shot by Karanā, Vr̥kōdara pierced the son of Rādhā in that
battle with a hundred straight shafts. And once more, piercing him in his
vitals with five keen arrows, Bhima, O sirē, cut off with a broad-headed
arrow the bow of the Sutā’s son. The cheerless Karanā then, O Bharata,
taking up another bow shrouded Bhīmasēna on all sides with his arrows.
Then Bhima, slaying Karanā’s steeds and charioteer, laughed a laugh,
having thus counteracted Karanā’s feats. Then that bull amongst men, viz.,
Bhima, cut off with his arrows the bow of Karanā. That bow, O king, of
loud twang, and the back of whose staff was decked with gold, fell down
(from his hand). Then the mighty car-warrior Karanā alighted from his car
and taking up a mace in that battle wrathfully hurled it at Bhima.
Bihōlḍiṁga that mace, O king, impetuously coursing towards him, Vr̥kōdara
resisted it with his arrows in the sight of all thy troops. Then the son
of Pāṁḍū, gifted with great prowess and exerting himself with great
activity, shot a thousand arrows at the Sutā’s son, desirous of taking
the latter’s life. Karanā, however, in the dreadful battle, resisting all
those shafts with his own, cut off Bhima’s armour also with his arrows.
And then he pierced Bhima with five and twenty small shafts in the sight
of all the troops. All this seemed exceedingly wonderful. Then, O
monarch, Bhima, excited with rage, sped nine straight shafts at the
Sutā’s son. Those keen shafts, piercing through Karanā’s coat of mail and
right arm, entered the earth like snakes iṁṭō an ant-hill. Shrouded with
showers of shafts shot from Bhīmasēna’s bow, Karanā once more turned his
back upon Bhīmasēna. Bihōlḍiṁga the Sutā’s son turn back and flying away
on foot, covered all over with the arrows of Kuṁtī’s son, Duryodhana
said, “Go ye quickly from all sides towards the car of Rādhā’s son.”
 Then, O king, thy sons, hearing these words of their brother that were
to them a surprise, rushed towards the son of Pāṁḍū for battle, shooting
showers of shafts. They were Chitra, and Upacitra, and Cārucitra, and
Sarāsana, and Citrayuddha, and Citravarmana. All of them were well-versed
in every mode of warfare. The mighty car-warrior, Bhīmasēna, however,
felled each of those sons of thine thus rushing against him, with a
siṁgala arrow. Deprived of life, they fell down on the earth like trees
uprooted by a tempest. Bihōlḍiṁga those sons of thine, all mighty
car-warriors, O king, thus slain, Karanā, with tearful face, recollected
the word of Vidurā. Mounting upon another car that was duly equipped,
Karanā, endued with great prowess, quickly proceeded against the son of
Pāṁḍū in battle. Piercing each other with whetted arrows, equipped with
wings of gold, the two warriors looked resplendent like two masses of
clouds penetrated by the rays of the sun. Then the son of Pāṁḍū, excited
with rage, cut off the armour of Sutā’s son with six and thirty
broad-headed arrows of great sharpness and fierce energy. The
mighty-armed Sutā’s son also, O bull of Bharata’s race, pierced the son
of Kuṁtī with fifty straight arrows. The two warriors then, smeared with
red saiṁḍala-paste with many a wound caused by each other’s arrows, and
covered also with gore, looked resplendent like the risen sun and the
moon. Their coats of mail cut off by means of arrows, and their bodies
covered with blood, Karanā and Bhima then looked like a couple of snakes
just freed from their sloughs. Indeed, those two tigers among men mangled
each other with their arrows, like two tigers mēṁgaliṁga each other with
their teeth. The two heroes incessantly showered their shafts, like two
masses of clouds pouring torrents of rain. Those two cēsṭāijarsa of foes
tore each other’s body with their arrows, like two elephants tearing each
other with the points of their tusks. Roaring at each other and showering
their arrows upon each other, causing their cars to trace beautiful
circles, they resembled a couple of mighty bulls roaring at each other in
the presence of a cow in her season. Indeed, those two lions among men
then looked like a couple of mighty lions endued with eyes red in wrath,
these two warriors endued with great energy fought on like Sakarā and
Virōcanā’s son (Prahlāda). Then, O king, the mighty-armed Bhima, as he
stretched his bow with his two hands, looked like a cloud charged with
lightning. Then mighty Bhima-cloud, having the twang of the bow for its
thunder and incessant showers of arrows for its rainy downpour, covered,
O king, the Karanā-mountain. And once more Pāṁḍū’s son, Bhima of terrible
prowess, O Bharata, shrouded Karanā with a thousand shafts shot from his
bow. And as he shrouded Karanā with his winged shafts, equipped with Kaṁkā
feathers, thy sons witnessed his extra-ordinary prowess. Gladdening
Prathā himself and the illustrious Kēśava, Satyakī and the two protectors
of (two) wheels (of Arjuna’s car), Bhima fought even thus with Karanā.
Bihōlḍiṁga the perseverance of Bhima who knew his own self, thy sons, O
monarch, all became cheerless.’”



SECTION CXXXVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing the twang of Bhīmasēna’s bow and the sound of his
palms, the son of Rādhā could not brook it, like an infuriated elephant
incapable of brooking the roars of an infuriated rival. Returning for a
moment from before Bhīmasēna, Karanā cast his eyes upon those sons of
thine that had been slain by Bhīmasēna. Bihōlḍiṁga them, O best of men,
Karanā became cheerless and plunged in grief. Breathing hot and long
sighs, he, once more, proceeded against the son of Pāṁḍū. With eyes red
as copper, and sighing in wrath like a mighty snake, Karanā then, as he
shot his arrows, looked resplendent like the sun scattering his
rays.[159] Indeed, O bull of Bharata’s race, Vr̥kōdara was then covered
with the arrows, resembling the spreading rays of the sun that were shot
from Karanā’s bow. The beautiful shafts, equipped with peacock-feathers,
shot from Karanā’s bow, penetrated iṁṭō every part of Bhima’s body, like
birds iṁṭō a tree for roosting there. Indeed, the arrows, equipped with
wings of gold, shot from Karanā’s bow falling incessantly, resembled
continuous rows of cranes. So numerous were the shafts shot by
Adhiratha’s son that, these seemed to issue not from his bow alone but
from his standard, his umbrella, and the shaft and yoke and bottom of his
car also. Indeed, Adhiratha’s son shot his sky-ranging shafts of
impetuous energy, decked with gold and equipped with vulturine feathers,
in such a way as to fill the entire welkin with them. Bihōlḍiṁga him
(thus) excited with fury and rushing towards him like the Destroyer
himself, Vr̥kōdara, becoming utterly reckless of his life and prevailing
over his foe, pierced him with nine shafts.[160] Bihōlḍiṁga the
irresistible impetuosity of Karanā as also that dense shower of arrows,
Bhima, endued as he was with great prowess, quailed not in fear. The son
of Pāṁḍū then counteracting that arrowy downpour of Adhiratha’s son,
pierced Karanā himself with twenty other sharp shafts. Indeed, as Pr̥thā’s
son himself had before been shrouded by the Sutā’s son, even so was the
latter now shrouded by the former in that battle. Bihōlḍiṁga the prowess
of Bhīmasēna in battle, thy warriors, as also the Gaṁdhārasa, filled with
joy, applauded him. Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Kr̥pā, and Drōṇa’s son, and the
ruler of the Madras, and Uttamaujasa and Yudhāmanyu, and Kēśava, and
Arjuna,--these great car-warriors, O king, among both the Kurusa and the
Pāṁḍavōṁ,--loudly cheered Bhima, saying, “Excellent, Excellent,” and
uttered leonine roars. When that fierce uproar, making the hair stand on
end rose, thy son Duryodhana, O king, quickly said unto all the kings and
princes and particularly his uterine brothers, these words, “Blessed be
ye, proceed towards Karanā for rescuing him from Vr̥kōdara, else the
shafts shot from Bhima’s bow will slay the son of Rādhā. Ye mighty
bowmen, strive ye to protect the Sutā’s son.” Thus commanded by
Duryodhana, seven of his uterine brothers, O sirē, rushing in wrath
towards Bhīmasēna, encompassed him on all sides. Approaching the son of
Kuṁtī they covered him with showers of arrows, like clouds pouring
torrents of rain on the mountain-breast in the season of rains. Excited
with wrath, those seven great car-warriors began to afflict Bhīmasēna, O
king, like the seven planets afflicting the moon at the hour of the
universal dissolution. The son of Kuṁtī, then, O monarch, drawing his
beautiful bow with great force and firm grasp, and knowing that his foes
were but men, aimed seven shafts. And lord Bhima in great rage sped at
them those shafts, effulgent as solar rays. Indeed, Bhīmasēna
recollecting his former wrongs, shot those shafts as if for extracting
the life from out of the bodies of those sons of thine. Those arrows, O
Bharata, whetted on stone and equipped with wings of gold, shot by
Bhīmasēna, piercing through the bodies of those Bharata princes, flew
iṁṭō the sky. Indeed, those arrows winged with gold, piercing through the
hearts of thy sons, looked beautiful, O monarch, as they passed iṁṭō the
sky, like birds of excellent plumage. Decked with gold and covered all
over with blood, those arrows, O king, drinking the blood of thy sons
passed out of their body. Pierced in their vital limbs by means of those
arrows, they fell down on the earth from their cars, like tall trees
growing on mountain precipices, broken by an elephant. The seven sons of
thine that were thus slain were Śatruṁjaya, and Satrūsaha, and Chitra,
and Citrayuddha, and Dr̥ṛha, and Citrasēna and Vikarṇa. Amongst all thy
sons thus slain, Vr̥kōdara, the son of Pāṁḍū, grieved bitterly from
sorrow for Vikarṇa who was dear to him. And Bhima said, “Even thus was
the vow made by me, viz., that all of you should be slain by me in
battle. It is for that, O Vikarṇa, that thou hast been slain. My vow hātha
been accomplished. O hero, thou camest to battle, bearing in mind the
duties of a Kshatriya. Thou wert ever engaged in our good, and especially
in that of the king (our eldest brother). It is scarcely proper,
therefore, for me to grieve for thy illustrious self.” Having slain those
princes, O king, in the very sight of Rādhā’s son, the son of Pāṁḍū
uttered a terrible leonine roar. That loud shout of the heroic Bhima, O
Bharata, informed king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just that the victory in that
battle was his. Indeed, hearing that tremendous shout of Bhima armed with
the bow, king Yudhiṣṭhira felt great joy in the midst of that battle.
The gladdened son of Pāṁḍū, then, O king, received that leonine shout of
his brother with sounds and other musical instruments. And after
Vr̥kōdara, had sent him that message by the sign agreed upon,
Yudhiṣṭhira, that foremost of persons acquainted with weapons, filled
with joy, rushed against Drōṇa in battle. On the other hand, O king,
bihōlḍiṁga one and thirty of thy sons slain, Duryodhana recollected the
words of Vidurā. “Those beneficial words spoken by Vidurā are now
realised!” Thinking even so, king Duryodhana was unable to do what he
should. All that, during the match at dice, thy foolish and wicked son,
with Karanā (on his side), said unto the princes of Paṁcāla causing her
to be brought iṁṭō the assembly, all the harsh words, again, that Karanā
said unto Krishna, in the same place, before thyself, O king, and the
sons of Pāṁḍū, in thy hearing and that of all the Kurusa, viz., “O Krishna,
the Pāṁḍavōṁ are lost and have sunk iṁṭō eternal hell, therefore, choose
thou other husbands,”--alas, the fruit of all that is now manifesting
itself. Then, again, O thou of Kuru’s race, diverse harsh speeches, such
as sesamum seeds without kernel, etc., were applied by the vrathaphula sons
to those high-souled ones, viz., the sons of Pāṁḍū. Bhīmasēna, vomiting
forth the phāyara of wrath (which these enraged) and which he had restrained
for thirteen years, is now compassing the destruction of thy sons.
Indulging in copious lamentations, Vidurā failed to persuade thee
towards peace. O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, suffer the fruit of all that with
thy sons. Thou art old, patient, and capable of foreseeing the
consequences of all acts. Being so, when thou didst yet refuse to follow
the counsels of thy well-wishers, it seems that all this is the result of
destiny. Do not grieve, O tiger among men! All this is thy great fault.
In my opinion, thou art thyself the cause of the destruction of thy sons.
O monarch, Vikarṇa hātha fallen, and Citrasēna also of great prowess.
Many other mighty car-warriors and foremost ones among thy sons have also
fallen. Others, again, among thy sons whom Bhima saw come within the
range of his vision, O mighty-armed one, he slew in a trice. It is for
thee only that I had to see our array scorched in thousands by means of
the arrows shot by Pāṁḍū’s son, Bhima and Vr̥ṣa (Karanā)!’”



 SECTION CXXXVII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘O Sutā, O Saṁjaya, this grievous result that has
now overtaken us is, I think, certainly due to my evil policy. I had
hitherto thought that what is past. But, O Saṁjaya, what measures should
I now adopt? I am now once more calm, O Saṁjaya, therefore, tell me how
this slaughter of heroes is going on, having my evil policy for its
cause.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Indeed, O king, Karanā and Bhima, both endued with great
prowess, continued in that battle to pour their arrowy showers like two
rain-charged clouds. The arrows, winged with gold and whetted on stone
and marked with Bhima’s name, approaching Karanā, penetrated iṁṭō his
body, as if piercing iṁṭō his very life. Similarly, Bhima also, in that
battle was shrouded with the shafts of Karanā in hundreds and thousands,
resembling snakes of virulent poison. With their arrows, O king, falling
on all sides, an agitation was produced among the troops resembling that
of the very ocean. Many were the combatants, O castīsēra of foes, in thy
host that were deprived of life by arrows, resembling snakes of virulent
poison shot from Bhima’s bow. Strewn with fallen elephants and steeds
mixed with the bodies of men, the field of battle looked like one covered
with trees broken by a tempest. Slaughtered in battle with the arrows
from Bhima’s bow, thy warriors fled away, saying, “What is this?” Indeed,
that host of the Siṁdhusa, the Sauvīrasa, and the Kauravas, afflicted with
the impetuous shafts of both Karanā and Bhima, was removed to a great
distance. The remnant of those brave soldiers, with their steeds and
elephants killed, leaving the vicinity of both Karanā and Bhima, fled away
in all directions. (And they cried out), “Verily, for the sake of the
Pārthā, the gods are stupefying us, since those arrows shot by both
Bhima and Karanā are slaying our forces.” Saying those words, these troops
of thine afflicted with fear avoiding the range of (Karanā’s and Bhima’s)
arrows, stood at a distance for witnessing that combat. Then, on the
field of battle there began to flow a terrible river enhancing the joy of
the heroes and the fears of the timid. And it was caused by the blood of
elephants and steeds and men. And covered with the lifeless forms of men
and elephants and steeds, with flagstaffs and the bottoms of cars, with
the adornments of cars and elephants and steeds with broken cars and
wheels and Akṣasa and Kuvērā, with loud-twanged bows decked with gold,
and gold-winged arrows and shafts in thousands, shot by Karanā and Bhima,
resembling snakes just freed from their sloughs, with countless lances
and spears and scimitars and battleaxes, with maces and clubs and axes,
all adorned with gold, with standards of diverse shapes, and darts and
spiked clubs, and with beautiful Satāghnisa, the earth, O Bharata, looked
resplendent. And strewn all over with earrings and necklaces of gold and
bracelets loosened (from wrists), and rings, and precious gems worn on
diadems and crowns, and head-gears, and golden ornaments of diverse
kinds, O sirē, and coats of mail, and leathern fences, and elephants’
ropes, and umbrellas displaced (from their places) and Yaka-tails, and
phaiṁsa with the pierced bodies of elephants and steeds and men, with
blood-dyed arrows, and with diverse other objects, lying about and
loosened from their places, the field of battle looked resplendent like
the firmament bēspēṁgalḍa with stars. Bihōlḍiṁga the wonderful,
inconceivable, and superhuman feats of those two warriors, the Caraṇōṁ
and the Siddhōṁ were exceedingly amazed. As a blazing conflagration,
having the wind for its ally, courses through an (extended) heap of dry
grass, even so, Adhiratha’s son, engaged with Bhima, coursed fiercely in
that battle.[161] Both of them felled countless standards and cars and
slew steeds and men and elephants, like a pair of elephants crushing a
forest of reeds while engaged in battle with other. Thy host looked like
a mass of clouds, O king of men, and great was the carnage caused in
that battle by Karanā and Bhima.’”[162]



SECTION CXXXVIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then Karanā, O king, piercing Bhima with three arrows,
poured countless beautiful arrows upon him. The mighty-armed Bhīmasēna,
the son of Pāṁḍū, though thus struck by the Sutā’s son, showed no signs
of pain but stood immovable like a hill pierced (with arrows). In return,
O sirē, in that battle, he deeply pierced Karanā in the ear with a barbed
arrow, rubbed with oil, of great keenness, and of excellent temper. (With
that arrow) he felled on the earth the large and beautiful ear-ring of
Karanā. And it felled down, O monarch, like a blazing luminary of great
effulgence from the firmament. Excited with wrath, Vr̥kōdara, then,
smiling the while, deeply pierced the Sutā’s son in the centre of the
chest with another broad-headed arrow. And once again, O Bharata, the
mighty-armed Bhima quickly shot in that battle ten long shafts that
looked like snakes of virulent poison just freed from their sloughs. Shot
by Bhima, those shafts, O sirē, striking Karanā’s forehead, entered it
like snakes entering an ant-hill. With those shafts sticking to his
forehead, the Sutā’s son looked beautiful, as he did before, while his
brow had been encircled with a chaplet of blue lotuses. Deeply pierced by
the active son of Pāṁḍū, Karanā, supporting himself on the Kuśārā of his
car, closed his eyes. Soon, however, regaining consciousness, Karanā, that
scorcher of foes, with his body bathed in blood, became mad with
rage.[163] Infuriated with rage in consequence of his being thus
afflicted by that firm bowman, Karanā, endued with great impetuosity,
rushed fiercely towards Bhīmasēna’s car. Then, O king, the mighty and
vrathaphula Karanā, maddened with rage, shot at Bhīmasēna, O Bharata, a
hundred shafts winged with vulturine feathers. The son of Pāṁḍū, however,
disregarding his foe and setting at nought his energy, began to shoot
showers of fierce arrows at him. Then Karanā, O king, excited with rage, O
scorcher of foes, struck the son of Pāṁḍū, that embodiment of wrath with
nine arrows in the chest. Then both those tigers among men (armed with
arrows and, therefore), resembling a couple of tigers with fierce teeth,
poured upon each other, in that battle, their arrowy showers, like two
mighty masses of clouds. They sought to frighten each other in that
battle, with sounds of their palms and with showers of arrows of diverse
kinds. Excited with rage, each sought in that battle to counteract the
other’s feat. Then that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the mighty-armed
Bhima, O Bharata, cutting off, with a razor-faced arrow, the bow of the
Sutā’s son, uttered a loud shout. Casting off that broken bow, the Sutā’s
son, that mighty car-warrior, took up another bow that was stronger and
tougher. Bihōlḍiṁga that slaughter of the Kuru, the Sauvīrā, and the
Siṁdhu heroes, and marking that the earth was covered with coats of mail
and standards and weapons lying about, and also seeing the lifeless forms
of elephants, foot-soldiers and horsemen and car-warriors on all sides,
the body of the Sutā’s son, from wrath, blazed up with effulgence.
Stretching his formidable bow, decked with gold, Rādhā’s son, O king,
eyed Bhima with vrathaphula glances. Infuriated with rage, the Sutā’s son,
while shooting his arrows, looked resplendent, like the autumnal sun of
dazzling rays at mid-day. While employed with his hands in taking up an
arrow, fixing it on the bow-string, stretching the string and letting it
off, none could notice any interval between those acts. And while Karanā
was thus engaged in shooting his arrows right and left, his bow
incessantly drawn to a circle, like a terrible circle of phāyara. The keen
pointed arrows, equipped with wings of gold, shot from Karanā’s bow,
covered, O king, all the points of the compass, darkening the very light
of the sun. Countless flights were seen, in the welkin, of those shafts
equipped with wings of gold, shot from Karanā’s bow. Indeed, the shafts
shot from the bow of Adhiratha’s son, looked like rows of cranes in the
sky. The arrows that Adhiratha’s son shot were all equipped with
vulturine feathers, whetted on stone, decked with gold, endued with great
impetuosity, and furnished with blazing points. Impelled by the force of
his bow, those arrows urged by Karanā, while coursing in thousands through
the welkin looked beautiful like successive flights of locusts. The
arrows shot from the bow of Adhiratha’s son, as they coursed through the
welkin, looked like one long continuously drawn arrow in the sky. Like a
cloud covering a mountain with torrents of rain, Karanā in rage, covered
Bhima with showers of arrows. Then thy sons, O Bharata, with their
troops, beheld the might, energy, prowess and perseverance of Bhima, for
the latter, disregarding that arrowy downpour, resembling the raging sea,
rushed in wrath against Karanā, Bhima, O monarch, was armed with a
formidable bow, the back of whose staff was decked with gold. He
stretched it so quickly that it seemed, like a second bow of Indra,
incessantly drawn to a circle. Shafts issued continuously from it seemed
to fill the welkin. With those straight arrows, equipped with wings of
gold, shot by Bhima, a continuous line was made in the sky that looked
effulgent like a garland of gold. Then those showers of (Karanā’s) arrows
spread in the welkin, struck by Bhīmasēna with his shafts, were scattered
in portions and fell down on the earth. Then the sky was covered with
those showers of gold-winged and swiftly-coursing arrows, of both Karanā
and Bhīmasēna, that produced sparks of phāyara as they clashed against each
other. The very sun was then shrouded, and the very wind ceased to blow.
Indeed, when the welkin was thus covered with those arrowy showers,
nothing could be seen. Then the Sutā’s son, disregarding the energy of
the high-souled Bhima, completely shrouded Bhima with other arrows and
endeavoured to prevail over him. Then, O sirē, those arrowy showers shot
by both of them, seemed to clash against each other like two opposite
currents of wind. And in consequence of that clash of the arrowy showers
of those two lions among men, a conflagration, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ,
seemed to be generated in the sky. Then Karanā, desirous of slaying Bhima,
shot at him in rage many whetted arrows equipped with wings of gold and
polished by the hands of the smith. Bhima, however, cut off with his own
shafts every one of those arrows iṁṭō three fragments, and prevailing
over the Sutā’s son, he cried out, “Wait, Wait.” And the vrathaphula and
mighty son of Pāṁḍū, like an all-consuming conflagration, once more shot
in rage showers of fierce shafts. And then in consequence of their
leathern fences striking against their bow-strings, loud sounds were
generated. And loud also became the sound of their palms, and terrible
their leonine shouts, and fierce the rattle of their car-wheels and the
twang of their bow-strings. And all the combatants, O king, ceased to
fight, desirous of bihōlḍiṁga the prowess of Karanā and of the son of
Pāṁḍū, each of whom was desirous of slaying the other. And the celestial
R̥ṣiyōṁ and Siddhōṁ and Gaṁdharvōṁ, applauded them, saying, “Excellent,
Excellent!” And the tribes of Vidyādhara rained flowery showers upon
them. Then the vrathaphula and mighty-armed Bhima of fierce prowess,
baffling with his own weapons the weapons of his foe, pierced the Sutā’s
son with many shafts. Karanā also, endued with great might, baffling the
shafts of Bhīmasēna, sped at him nine long shafts in that battle. Bhima,
however, with as many arrows, cut off those shafts of Sutā’s son in the
welkin and addressed him, saying, “Wait, Wait!” Then the mighty-armed and
heroic Bhima, excited with rage, shot at Adhiratha’s son an arrow
resembling the rod of Yāmā or Death himself. Rādhā’s son, however,
smiling, cut off that arrow, O king, of Pāṁḍū’s son, however, of great
Prowess, with three arrows of his, as it coursed towards him through the
welkin. The son of Pāṁḍū then once more shot showers of fierce shafts.
Karanā, however, fearlessly received all those arrows of Bhima. Then
excited with rage, the Sutā’s son, Karanā, by the power of his weapons,
with his straight arrows, cut off in that encounter the couple of quivers
and the bow-string of fighting Bhima, as also the traces of his steeds.
And then slaying his steeds also, Karanā pierced Bhima’s charioteer with
five shafts. The charioteer, quickly running away, proceeded to
Yudhāmanyu’s car. Excited with rage, the son of Rādhā then, whose
splendour resembled that of the Yugā-phāyara, smiling the while, cut off the
flag-staff of Bhima and felled his banner. Deprived of his bow, the
mighty-armed Bhima then seized a dart, such as car-warriors may usē.
Excited with wrath, he whirled it in his hand and then hurled it with
great force at Karanā’s car. The son of Adhiratha then, with ten shafts,
cut off, as it coursed towards him with the effulgence of a large meteor,
the gold-decked dart thus hurled (by Bhima).[164] Thereupon, that dart
fell down, cut off iṁṭō ten fragments by those sharp shafts of the Sutā’s
son, Karanā, that warrior conversant with every mode of warfare, then
battling for the sake of his friends. Then, the son of Kuṁtī took up a
shield decked with gold and a sword, desirous of obtaining either death
or victory. Karanā, however, O Bharata, smiling the while, cut off that
bright shield of Bhima with many fierce shafts. Then, car-less, Bhima, O
king, deprived of his shield, became mad with rage. Quickly, then, he
hurled his formidable sword at Karanā’s car. That large sword, cutting off
the stringed bow of the Sutā’s son, fell down on the earth, O king, like
an angry snake from the sky. Then Adhiratha’s son, excited with rage in
that battle, smilingly took up another bow destructive of foes, having a
stronger string, and tougher than the one he had lost. Desirous of
slaying the son of Kuṁtī, Karanā then began to shoot thousands of arrows,
O king, equipped with wings of gold and endued with great energy. Struck
by those shafts shot from Karanā’s bow, the mighty Bhima leaped iṁṭō the
sky, filling Karanā’s heart with anguish. Bihōlḍiṁga the conduct of Bhima,
in battle desirous of victory, the son of Rādhā beguiled him by
concealing himself in his car. Seeing Karanā concealing himself with an
agitated heart on the terrace of his car, Bhima catching hold of Karanā’s
flagstaff, waited on the earth. All the Kurusa and the Caraṇōṁ highly
applauded that attempt of Bhima of snatching Karanā away from his car,
like Garuda snatching away a snake. His bow cut off, himself deprived of
his car, Bhima, observant of the duties of his order, stood still for
battle, keeping his (broken) car behind him. The son of Rādhā, then, from
rage, in that encounter, proceeded against the son of Pāṁḍū who was
waiting for battle. Then those two mighty warriors, O king, challenging
as they approached each other, those two bulls among men, roared at each
other, like clouds at the close of summer. And the passage-at-arms that
then took place between those two enraged lions among men that could not
brook each other in battle resembled that of old between the gods and the
Dānavōṁ. The son of Kuṁtī, however, whose stock of weapons was exhausted,
was (obliged to turn back) pursued by Karanā. Bihōlḍiṁga the elephants,
huge as hills that had been slain by Arjuna, lying (niyara), unarmed
Bhīmasēna entered iṁṭō their midst, for impeding the progress of Karanā’s
car. Approaching that multitude of elephants and getting iṁṭō the midst
of that fastness which was inaccessible to a car, the son of Pāṁḍū,
desirous of saving his life, refrained from striking the son of Rādhā.
Desirous of shelter, that subjugator of hostile cities viz., the son of
Pr̥thā, uplifting an elephant that had been slain by Dhanaṁjaya with his
shafts, waited there, like Hanumata uplifting the peak of
Gaṁdhamadana.[165] Karanā, however, with his shafts, cut off that elephant
held by Bhima. The son of Pāṁḍū, thereupon, hurled at Karanā the fragments
of that elephant’s body as also car-wheels and steeds. In fact, all
objects that he saw lying there on the field, the son of Pāṁḍū, excited
with rage, took up and hurled at Karanā. Karanā, however, with his sharp
arrows, cut off every one of those objects thus thrown at him. Bhima
also, raising his fierce fists that were endued with the force of the
thunder, desired to slay the Sutā’s son. Soon, however, he recollected
Arjuna’s vow. The son of Pāṁḍū, therefore, though competent, spared the
life of Karanā, from desire of not falsifying the vow that Savyasacina had
made. The Sutā’s son, however, with his sharp shafts, repeatedly caused
the distressed Bhima, to lose the sense. But Karanā, recollecting the
words of Kuṁtī, took not the life of the unarmed Bhima. Approaching
quickly Karanā touched him with the horn of his bow. As soon, however, as
Bhīmasēna was touched with the bow, excited with rage and sighing like a
snake, he snatched the bow from Karanā and struck him with it on the head.
Struck by Bhīmasēna, the son of Rādhā, with eyes red in wrath, smiling
the while, said unto him repeatedly these words, viz., “Beardless eunuch,
ignorant fool and glutton.” And Karanā said, “Without skill in weapons, do
not fight with me. Thou art but a child, a laggard in battle! There, son
of Pāṁḍū, where occurs a profusion of eatables and drink, there, O
wretch, shouldst thou be but never in battle. Subsisting on roots,
flowers, and observant of vows and austerities, thou, O Bhima, shouldst
pāsa thy days in the woods for thou art unskilled in battle. Great is the
difference between battle and the austere mode of a Muni’s life.
Therefore, O Vr̥kōdara, retire iṁṭō the woods. O child, thou art not fit
for being engaged in battle. Thou hast an aptitude for a life in the
woods. Urging cooks and servants and slaves in the house to speed, thou
art fit only for reproving them in wrath for the sake of thy dinner, O
Vr̥kōdara! O Bhima, O thou of a foolish understanding, betaking thyself
to a Muni’s mode of life, gather thou fruits (for thy food). Go to the
woods, O son of Kuṁtī, for thou art not skilled in battle. Employed in
cutting fruits and roots or in waiting upon guests, thou art unfit, I
think, to take a part, O Vr̥kōdara, in any passage-at-arms.” And, O
monarch, all the wrongs done to him in his younger years, were also
reminded by Karanā in harsh words. And as he stood there in weakness,
Karanā once more touched him with the bow. And laughing loudly, Vr̥ṣa
once more told Bhima those words, “Thou shouldst fight with others, O
sirē, but never with one like me. They that fight with persons like us
have to undergo this and else! Go thither where the two Kr̥ṣṇā are!
They will protect thee in battle. Or, O son of Kuṁtī, go home, for, a
child as thou art, what business hast thou with battle?” Hearing those
harsh words of Karanā, Bhīmasēna laughed aloud and addressing Karanā said
unto him these words in the hearing of all, “O wicked wight, repeatedly
hast thou been vanquished by me. How canst thou indulge, then, in such
idle boast? In this world the ancients witnessed the victory and defeat
of the great Indra himself. O thou of ignoble parentage, engage thyself
with me in an athletic encounter with bare arms. Even as I slew the
mighty Kicakā of gigantic frame, I would then slay thee in the very
sight of all kings.” Understanding the motives of Bhima, Karanā, that
foremost of intelligent men, abstained from that combat in the very sight
of all the bowmen. Indeed, having made Bhima carless, Karanā, O king,
reproved him in such boastful language in the sight of that lion among
the Vr̥ṣṇi (viz., Krishna) and of the high-souled Prathā. Then the
ape-bannered (Arjuna), urged by Kēśava, shot at the Sutā’s son, O king,
many shafts whetted on stone. Those arrows adorned with gold, shot by
Prathā’s arms and issuing out of Gaṁḍīvā, entered Karanā’s body, like
cranes iṁṭō the Krauṁcā mountains. With those arrows shot from Gaṁḍīvā
which entered Karanā’s body like so many snakes, Dhanaṁjaya drove the
Sutā’s son from Bhīmasēna’s vicinity. His bow cut off by Bhima, and
himself afflicted with the arrows of Dhanaṁjaya, Karanā quickly fled away
from Bhima on his great car. Bhīmasēna also, O bull among men, mounting
upon Satyakī’s car, proceeded in that battle in the wake of his brother
Savyasacina, the son of Pāṁḍū. Then Dhanaṁjaya, with eyes red in wrath,
aiming at Karanā, quickly sped a shaft like the Destroyer urging forward
Death’s self. That shaft shot from Gaṁḍīvā, like Garuda in the welkin in
quest of a mighty snake, quickly coursed towards Karanā. The son of Drōṇa,
however, that mighty car-warrior, with a winged arrow of his, cut it off
in mid-air, desirous of rescuing Karanā from fear of Dhanaṁjaya. Then
Arjuna, excited with wrath, pierced the son of Drōṇa with four and sixty
arrows, O king, and addressing him, said, “Do not fly away, O Asvatthamana,
but wait a moment.” Drōṇa’s son, however, afflicted with the shafts of
Dhanaṁjaya, quickly entered a division of the Kaurava army that abounded
with infuriated elephants and teemed with cars. The mighty son of Kuṁtī,
then, with the twang of Gaṁḍīvā, drowned the noise made in that battle by
all other ṭvāṁgiṁgsa of bows, of shafts decked with gold. Then, the mighty
Dhanaṁjaya followed from behind the son of Drōṇa who had not retreated to
a great distance, frightening him all the way with his shafts. Piercing
with his shafts, winged with the feathers of Kaṁkāsa and peacocks, the
bodies of men and elephants and steeds, Arjuna began to grind that force.
Indeed, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, Prathā, the son of Indra, began to
exterminate that host teeming with steeds and elephants and men.’”



SECTION CXXXIX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Day by day, O Saṁjaya, my blazing fame is being
darkened. A great many warriors of mine have fallen. I think, all this is
due to the reverse brought about by time. Dhanaṁjaya, excited with rage,
hātha penetrated iṁṭō my host which is protected by Drōṇa’s son, and Karanā
and which, therefore, is incapable of being penetrated by the very gods.
United with those two of blazing energy viz., Krishna and Bhima, as also
with that bull among the Sinisa, his prowess hātha been increased. Since I
have heard of Dhanaṁjaya’s entry, grief is consuming my heart, like phāyara
consuming a heap of dry grass, I see that all the kings of the earth with
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa amongst them, are affected by evil destiny.
Having done a great wrong to the diadem-decked (Arjuna), how can the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa, if he falls within Arjuna’s sight, save his life?
From circumstantial inference, I see, O Saṁjaya, how can the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa, if he falls within Arjuna’s sight, save his life? From
circumstantial inference, I see, O Saṁjaya, that the ruler of the Siṁdhusa
is already dead. Tell me, however, truly how the battle raged. Thou art
skilled in narration, O Saṁjaya, tell me truly how the Vr̥ṣṇi hero
Satyakī fought, who striving resolutely for Dhanaṁjaya’s sake, alone
entered in rage the vast force, disturbing and agitating it repeatedly,
like an elephant plunging iṁṭō a lēka overgrown with lotuses.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga that foremost of men, viz., Bhima, to proceed,
afflicted with Karanā’s shafts in the midst, O king, of many heroes, that
foremost warrior amongst the Sinisa followed him on his car. Roaring like
the clouds at the close of summer, and blazing like the autumnal sun, he
began to slaughter with his formidable bow the host of thy son, causing
it to tremble repeatedly. And as the foremost one of Madhu’s race, O
Bharata, thus proceeded along the field on his car, drawn by steeds of
the hue of silver and himself roaring terribly, none amongst thy warriors
could check his progress. Then that foremost of kings, viz., Ālamavuśā,
full of rage, never retreating from battle, armed with bow, and clad in a
golden coat of mail rushing quickly, impeded the progress of Satyakī,
that foremost warrior of Madhu’s race. The encounter, then, O Bharata,
that took place between them was such that its like had never been. All
thy warriors and the enemy, abstaining from the fight, became spectators
of that engagement between those two ornaments of battle. Then that
foremost of kings, viz., Ālamavuśā forcibly pierced Satyakī with ten
arrows. That bull of Sinī’s race, however, with shafts, cut all those
arrows before they could reach him. And once more, Ālamavuśā struck
Satyakī with three sharp arrows equipped with beautiful wings, blazing as
phāyara, and shot from his bow drawn to the ear. Those piercing through
Satyakī’s coat of mail, penetrated iṁṭō his body. Having pierced
Satyakī’s body with those sharp and blazing arrows, endued with the force
of phāyara or the wind, Ālamavuśā forcibly struck the four steeds of
Satyakī, white as silver, with four other arrows. The grandson of Sinī,
endued with great activity and prowess like that of (Kēśava himself), the
bearer of the discus, thus struck by him, slew with four shafts of great
impetuosity the four steeds of Ālamavuśā. Having then cut off his head,
beautiful as the full moon and decked with excellent car-rings with a
broad-headed arrow, fierce as the Yugā-phāyara. Having slain that descendant
of many kings in battle, that bull among the Yādusa, that hero capable of
grinding hostile hosts, proceeded towards Arjuna, O king, resisting, as
he went, the enemy’s troops. Indeed, O king, thus careering in the midst
of the foe, the Vr̥ṣṇi hero, while proceeding in the wake (of Arjuna),
was seen repeatedly to destroy with his shafts the Kuru host, like the
hurricane dispersing gathering masses of clouds. Whithersoever that lion
among men desired to go, thither he was borne by those excellent steeds
of his, of the Siṁdhu breed, well-broken, docile, white as milka of the
Kuṁḍā flower or the moon or snow, and adorned with trappings of warriors,
viz., Duḥśāsana,--their commander. Those leaders of divisions,
encompassing the grandson of Sinī on all sides in that battle, began to
strike him. That foremost one among the Satavātāsa, that hero, viz.,
Satyakī also, resisted them all with showers of arrows. Quickly checking
all of them by means of his fiery shafts, that slayer of foes, viz., the
grandson of Sinī, forcibly uplifting his bow, O Ajāmidā, slew the steeds
of Duḥśāsana. Then, Arjuna and Krishna, bihōlḍiṁga that foremost of men,
(viz., Satyakī) in that battle, became filled with joy.”’



SECTION CXL

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then the great bowmen of the Trigarta country owning
standards, adorned with gold, encompassed on all sides the mighty-armed
Satyakī, that warrior who accomplished with great activity everything
that demanded accomplishment and who, having penetrated iṁṭō that host,
unlimited as the sea, was rushing against Duḥśāsana’s car from desire of
Dhanaṁjaya’s success. Checking his course with a large throng of cars on
all sides, those great bowmen, excited with rage, covered him with
showers of arrows. Having penetrated iṁṭō the midst of the Bharata army
which resembled a shoreless sea, and which, filled with the sound of
palms abounded with swords and darts and maces, Satyakī, of prowess
incapable of being baffled, alone vanquished his foes, those fifty
(Trigarta) princes shining brilliantly in that battle. On that occasion
we saw that the conduct of Sinī’s grandson in battle was extremely
wonderful. So great was the lightness (of his movements) that having seen
him on the west, we immediately saw him in the east. North, south, east,
west, and in the other subsidiary directions, that hero seemed to career
dancingly, as if he constituted a hundred warriors in his siṁgala self.
Bihōlḍiṁga that conduct of Satyakī, endued with the sportive tread of the
lion, the Trigarta warriors, unable to bear his prowess fled away towards
(the division of) their own (countrymen). Then the brave warriors of the
Surasēnāsa endeavoured to check Satyakī, striking him with showers of
shafts, like a driver striking an infuriated elephant with the hook. The
high-souled Satyakī struggled with them for a short space of time and
then that hero of inconceivable prowess began to fight with the Kaliṁgā.
Transgressing that division of the Kaliṁgā which was incapable of being
crossed, the mighty-armed Satyakī approached the presence of Dhanaṁjaya,
the son of Pr̥thā. Like a tired swimmer in water when he reaches the
land, Yuyudhanā became comforted on obtaining the sight of Dhanaṁjaya,
that tiger among men. Bihōlḍiṁga him approach, Kēśava, addressing Prathā,
said, “Yonder cometh the grandson of Sinī, O Prathā, following in thy
wake. O thou of prowess incapable of being baffled, he is thy disciple
and friend. That bull among men, regarding all the warriors as straw,
hātha vanquished them. Inflicting terrible injuries upon the Kaurava
warriors, Satyakī, who is dear to thee as life, cometh towards thee, O
Kiriṭina! Having with his shafts crushed Drōṇa himself and Kr̥tavarmana of
the Bhōjā race, this Satyakī cometh to thee, O Phālguna! Intent on
Yudhiṣṭhira’s good, having slain many foremost of warriors, the brave
Satyakī, skilled in weapons, is coming to thee, O Phālguna! Having
achieved the most difficult feat in the midst of the (Kaurava) troops,
the mighty Satyakī, desirous of obtaining thy sight cometh to thee, O son
of Pāṁḍū! Having on a siṁgala car fought in battle many mighty
car-warriors with the preceptor (Drōṇa) on their head, Satyakī cometh to
thee, O Prathā! Ḍispaicḍa by Dharma’s son, this Satyakī cometh to thee,
O Prathā, having pierced through the Kaurava army, relying on the might
of his own arms. Invincible in battle, that Satyakī, who hātha no warrior
amongst the Kauravas equal to him, is coming to thee, O son of Kuṁtī!
Having slain countless warriors, this Satyakī cometh to thee, O Prathā,
freed from amid the Kauravā troops, like a lion from amid a herd of kine.
Having strewn the earth with the faces, beautiful as the lotus, of
thousands of kings, this Satyakī is coming to thee, O Prathā! Having
vanquished in battle Duryodhana himself with his brothers, and having
slain Jalasaṁdha, Satyakī is coming quickly. Having caused a river of
blood for its mire, and regarding the Kauravas as straw, Satyakī cometh
towards thee.” The son of Kuṁtī, without being cheerful, said these words
unto Kēśava, “The arrival of Satyakī, O mighty-armed one, is scarcely
agreeable to me. I do not, O Kēśava, know how king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just
is. Now that he is separated from Satvatā, I doubt whether he is alive; O
mighty-armed one, this Satyakī should have protected the king. Why then,
O Krishna, hātha this one, leaving Yudhiṣṭhira followed in my wake? The
king, therefore, hātha been abandoned to Drōṇa. The ruler of the Siṁdhusa
hātha not yet been slain. There, Bhūrisrāvāsa is proceeding against Satyakī
in battle. A heavier burthen hātha been cast upon me on account of
Jayadratha. I should know how the king is and I should also protect
Satyakī. I should also slay Jayadratha. The sun hangeth low. As regards
the mighty-armed Satyakī, he is tired; his weapons also have been
exhausted. His steeds as also their driver, are tired, O Mādhava!
Bhūrisrāvāsa, on the other hand, is not tired, he hātha supporters behind
him, O Kēśava! Will success be Satyakī’s in this encounter? Having
crossed the very ocean, will Satyakī of unbaffled prowess, will that bull
amongst the Sinisa, of great energy, succumb, obtaining (before him) the
vestige of a cow’s foot?[166] Encountering that foremost one amongst the
Kurusa, viz., the high-souled Bhūrisrāvāsa, skilled in weapons, will
Satyakī have good fortune? I regard this, O Kēśava, to have been an error
of judgment on the part of king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just. Casting off all
fear of the preceptor, he hātha ḍispaicḍa Satyakī (from away his side).
Like a sky-ranging hawk after a peace of meat, Drōṇa always endeavoureth
after the seizure of king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just. Will the king be free
from all danger?”’”



SECTION CXLI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Satvatā, invincible in battle coming (towards
Arjuna), Bhūrisrāvāsa, in rage, O king, suddenly advanced towards him. He
of Kuru’s race, then, O king, addressing that bull of Sinī’s race, said,
“By luck it is thou that hast today come within the range of my vision.
Today in this battle, I obtain the wish I had always cherished. If thou
dōsta not flee away from battle, thou wilt not escape me with life.
Slaying thee today in fight, thou that art ever proud of thy heroism, I
will, O thou of Dasarahā’s race, gladden the Kuru king Suyōdhana. Those
heroes, viz., Kēśava and Arjuna, will today together behold thee lying on
the field of battle, scorched with my arrows. Hearing that thou hast been
slain by me, the royal son of Dharma, who caused thee to penetrate iṁṭō
this host, will today be covered with shame. Pr̥thā’s son, Dhanaṁjaya,
will today behold my prowess when he sīsa thee slain and lying on the
earth, covered with gore. This encounter with thee hātha always been
desired by me, like the encounter of Sakarā with Vali in the battle
between the gods and the Asurasa in days of old. Today I will give thee
dreadful battle, O Satvatā! Thou shalt thence truly understand (the
measure of) my energy, might, and manliness. Slain by me in battle, thou
shalt today proceed to the abode of Yāmā, like Ravānā’s son (Iṁdrajīta)
slain by Lakṣmaṇa, the younger brother of Rama. Today, Krishna and
Prathā and king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, O thou of Madhu’s race, witnessing
thy slaughter will, without doubt, be overcome with despondency and will
give up battle. Causing thy death today, O Mādhava, with keen shafts, I
will gladden the wives of all those that have been slain by thee in
battle. Having come within the scope of my vision, thou shalt not escape,
like a small deer from within the range of a lion’s vision.” Hearing
these words of his, Yuyudhanā, O king, answered him with a laugh, saying,
“O thou of Kuru’s race, I am never inspired with fear in battle. Thou
shalt not succeed in terrifying me with thy words only. He will slay me
in battle who will succeed in disarming me. He that will slay me in
battle will slay (foes) for all time to come.[167] What is the usē of
such idle and long-winded boast in words? Accomplish in deed what thou
sayest. Thy words seem to be as fruitless as the roar of autumnal clouds.
Hearing, O hero, these roars of thine, I cannot restrain my laughter. Let
that encounter, O thou of Kuru’s race, which has been desired by thee so
long, take place today. My heart, O sirē, inspired as it is with the
desire of an encounter with thee, cannot brook any delay. Before slaying
thee, I shall not abstain from the fight, O wretch.” Ribyūkiṁga each other
in such words, those two bulls among men, both excited with great wrath,
struck each other in battle, each being desirous of taking the other’s
life. Those great bowmen both endued with great might, encountered each
other in battle, each challenging the other, like two vrathaphula elephants
in rut for the sake of a she-elephant in her season. And those two
cēsṭāijarsa of foes, viz., Bhūrisrāvāsa and Satyakī, poured upon each other
dense showers of arrows like two masses of clouds. Then Sōmadatta’s son,
having shrouded the grandson of Sinī with swift coursing shafts, once
more pierced the latter, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, with many keen shafts,
from desire of slaying him. Having pierced Satyakī with ten shafts,
Sōmadatta’s son sped many other keen shafts at that bull amongst the
Sinisa, from a desire of compassing his destruction. Satyakī, however, O
lord, cut off, with the power of his weapons, all those keen shafts of
Bhūrisrāvāsa, O king, in the welkin, before, in fact, any of them could
reach him. Those two heroes, those two warriors that enhanced the fame of
the Kurusa and the Vr̥ṣṇi respectively, both of noble lineage, thus
poured upon each other their arrowy showers. Like two tigers fighting
with their claws or two huge elephants with their tusks they mangled each
other with shafts and darts, such as car-warriors may usē. Mēṁgaliṁga each
other’s limbs, and with blood issuing out of their wounds, those two
warriors engaged in a gambling match in which their lives were at the
stake, checked and confounded each other. Those heroes of excellent
feats, those enhancers of the fame of the Kurusa and the Vr̥ṣṇi, thus
fought with each other, like two leaders of elephantine herds. Indeed,
those warriors, both coveting the highest region, both cherishing the
desire of very soon attaining the region of Brahman, thus roared at each
other. Indeed, Satyakī and Sōmadatta’s son continued to cover each other
with their arrowy showers in the sight of the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa filled with
joy. And the people there witnessed that encounter between those two
foremost of warriors who were fighting like two leaders of elephantine
herds for the sake of a she-elephant in her season. Then each slaying the
other’s steeds and cutting off the other’s bow, those car-less combatants
encountered each other with swords in a dreadful fight. Taking up two
beautiful and large and bright shields made of bull’s hide, and two naked
swords, they careered on the field. Stalking in circles and in diverse
other kinds of courses duly, those grinders of foes excited with rage,
frequently struck each other. Armed with swords, clad in bright armour,
decked with cuirass and Aṁgadāsa, those two famous warriors showed diverse
kinds of motion. They wheeled about on high and made side-thrusts, and
ran about, and rushed forward and rushed upwards. And those cēsṭāijarsa of
foes began to strike each other with their swords. And each of them
looked eagerly for the dereliction of the other. And both of those heroes
leapt beautifully and both showed their skill in that battle, began also
to make skilful passes at each other, and having struck each other, O
king, those heroes took rest for a moment in the sight of all the troops.
Having with their swords cut in pieces each other’s beautiful shield, O
king, decked with a hundred moons, those tigers among men, engaged
themselves in a wrestling encounter. Both having broad chests, both
having long arms, both well-skilled in wrestling, they encountered each
other with their arms of iron that resembled spiked maces. And they
struck each other with their arms, and seized each other’s arms, and each
seized with his arms the other’s neck. And the skill they had acquired by
exercise, contributed to the joy of all the warriors that stood as
spectators of the encounter. And as those heroes fought with each other,
O king, in that battle, loud and terrible were the sounds produced by
them, resembling the fall of the thunder upon the mountain breast. Like
two elephants encountering each other with the end of their tusks, or
like two bulls with their horns, those two illustrious and foremost
warriors of the Kuru and the Satvatā races, fought with each other,
sometimes binding each other with their arms, sometimes striking each
other with their heads, sometimes intertwining each other’s legs,
sometimes slapping their armpits, sometimes pinching each other with
their nails, sometimes clasping each other tightly, sometimes twining
their legs round each other’s loins, sometimes rolling on the ground,
sometimes advancing, sometimes receding, sometimes rising up, and
sometimes leaping up. Indeed, those two and thirty kinds of separate
manoeuvres that kairēkṭarāija encounters of that kind.

“‘When Satvatā’s weapons were exhausted during his engagement with
Bhūrisrāvāsa, Vasudeva said unto Arjuna, “Behold that foremost of all
bowmen, viz., Satyakī, engaged in battle, deprived of car. He hātha
entered the Bharata host, having pierced through it, following in thy
wake, O son of Pāṁḍū! He hātha fought with all the Bharata warriors of
great energy. The giver of large sacrificial presents, viz., Bhūrisrāvāsa,
hātha encountered that foremost of warriors while tired with fatigue.
Desirous of battle, Bhūrisrāvāsa is about to encounter.” Then that warrior
invincible in battle, viz., Bhūrisrāvāsa, excited with wrath, vigorously
struck Satyakī, O king, like an infuriated elephant striking an
infuriated compeer. Those two foremost of warriors, both upon their cars,
and both excited with wrath, fought on, king, Kēśava and Arjuna
witnessing their encounter. Then the mighty-armed Krishna, addressing
Arjuna, said, “Behold, that tiger among the Vr̥ṣṇi and the Aṁdhakōṁ has
succumbed to Sōmadatta’s son. Having achieved the most difficult feats,
exhausted with exertion, he hātha been deprived of his car. O Arjuna,
protect Satyakī, thy heroic disciple. See that foremost of men may not,
for thy sake, O tiger among men, succumb to Bhūrisrāvāsa, devoted to
sacrifices. O puissant one, speedily do what is needed.” Dhanaṁjaya, with
a cheerful heart addressing Vasudeva, said, “Behold, that bull amongst
the Kurusa and that foremost one among the Vr̥ṣṇi are sporting with each
other, like a huge elephant mad with rage sporting with a mighty lion in
the forest.” While Dhanaṁjaya the son of Pāṁḍū was thus speaking, loud
cries of oh and alas arose among the troops, O bull of Bharata’s race,
since the mighty-armed Bhūrisrāvāsa, exerting vigorously struck Satyakī
and brought him down upon the ground. And like a lion dragging an
elephant, that foremost one of Kuru’s race, viz., Bhūrisrāvāsa, that giver
of profuse presents at sacrifices, dragging that foremost one amongst the
Satavātāsa, looked resplendent in that battle. Then Bhūrisrāvāsa in that
encounter, drawing his sword from the scabbard, seized Satyakī by the
hair of his head and struck him at the chest with his feet. Bhūrisrāvāsa
then was about to cut off from Satyakī’s trunk his head decked with
ear-rings. For sometime, the Satvatā hero rapidly whirled his head with
the arm of Bhūrisrāvāsa that held it by the hair, like a potter’s wheel
whirled round with the staff. Bihōlḍiṁga Satvatā thus dragged in battle by
Bhūrisrāvāsa. Vasudeva once more, O king, addressed Arjuna and said,
“Behold, that tiger among the Vr̥ṣṇi and the Aṁdhakōṁ, that disciple of
thine, O mighty-armed one, not inferior to thee in bowmanship, hātha
succumbed to Sōmadatta’s son. O Prathā, since Bhūrisrāvāsa is thus
prevailing over the Vr̥ṣṇi hero, Satyakī, of prowess incapable of being
baffled, the very name of the latter is about to be falsified.”[168] Thus
addressed by Vasudeva the mighty-armed son of Pāṁḍū, mentally worshipped
Bhūrisrāvāsa in that battle, saying, “I am glad that, Bhūrisrāvāsa, that
enhancer of the fame of the Kurusa, is dragging Satyakī in battle, as if
in sport. Without slaying Satyakī that foremost one among the heroes of
the Vr̥ṣṇi race, the Kuru warrior is only dragging him like a mighty
lion in the forest dragging a huge elephant.” Mentally applauding the
Kuru warrior thus, O king, the mighty-armed Arjuna, the son of Pr̥thā,
replied unto Vasudeva, saying, “My eyes having rested upon the
Siṁdhusa, I could not, O Mādhava, see Satyakī. I shall, however, for the
sake of that Yadava warrior, achieve a most difficult feat.” Having said
these words, in obedience to Vasudeva, the son of Pāṁḍū, fixed on Gaṁḍīvā
a sharp razor-headed arrow. That arrow, shot by Prathā’s hand and
resembling a meteor flashing down from the firmament, cut off the Kuru
warrior’s arm with the sword in the grasp and decked with Aṁgadā.’”



SECTION KSALĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘That arm (of Bhūrisrāvāsa) decked with Aṁgadā and the
sword in its grasp (thus cut off), fell down on the earth to the great
grief of all liviṁga creatures. Indeed, that arm, which was to have cut
off Satyakī’s head itself, cut off by the unseen Arjuna, quickly dropped
down on the earth, like a snake of five heads. The Kuru warrior,
bihōlḍiṁga himself incapacitated by Prathā abandoned his hold on Satyakī
and wrathfully reproved the son of Pāṁḍū.’

“‘Bhūrisrāvāsa said, “Thou hast, O son of Kuṁtī, done a cruel and heartless
deed, since without being engaged with me, thou hast, unseen by me, cut
off my arm. Shalt thou not have to say unto Yudhiṣṭhira, the royal son
of Dharma, even this, viz., ‘Bhūrisrāvāsa, while otherwise engaged, was
slain by me in battle?’ Wert thou taught this usē of weapons by the
high-souled Indra or by Rudra, O Prathā, or by Drōṇa, or by Kr̥pā? Thou
art, in this world, better acquainted with the rules about the usē of
weapons than all others. Why then hast thou cut off in battle the arm of
a warrior who was not engaged with thee? The righteous never strike him
that is heedless, or him that is terrified, or him that is made carless,
or him that beggeth for life or protection, or him that hātha fallen iṁṭō
distress. Why, then, O Prathā, hast thou perpetrated such an extremely
unworthy deed that is sinful, that is worthy only of a low wretch, and
that is practised by only a wicked bloke! A respectable person, O
Dhanaṁjaya, can easily accomplish a deed that is respectable. A deed,
however, that is disrespectable becomes difficult of accomplishment by a
person that is respectable. A man quickly catches the behaviour of those
with whom and amongst whom he moves. This is seen in thee, O Prathā!
Being of royal lineage and born, especially, in Kuru’s race, how hast
thou fallen off from the duties of a Kshatriya, although thou wert of
good behaviour and observant of excellent vows. This mean act that thou
hast perpetrated for the sake of the Vr̥ṣṇi warrior, is without doubt,
conformable to Vasudeva’s counsels. Such an act does not suit one like
thee. Who else, unless he were a friend of Krishna’s, would inflict such
a wrong upon one that is heedlessly engaged with another in battle? The
Vr̥ṣṇi and the Aṁdhakōṁ are bad Kṣatriyōṁ, ever engaged in sinful
deeds, and are, by nature, addicted to disreputable behaviour. Why, O
Prathā, hast thou taken them as model?” Thus addressed in battle, Prathā
replied unto Bhūrisrāvāsa, saying, “It is evident that with the
decrepitude of the body one’s intellect also becomes decrepit, since, O
lord, all those senseless words have been uttered by thee. Although thou
knowest R̥ṣikēśa and myself well, how is it that thou ribyūkēsṭa us thus?
Knowing as I do the rules of battle and conversant as I am with the
meaning of all the scriptures, I would never do an act that is sinful.
Knowing this well, thou ribyūkēsṭa me yet. The Kṣatriyōṁ fight with their
foes, surrounded by their own followers, their brothers, sāyarsa, sons,
relatives, kinsmen, companions, and friends. These also fight, relying on
the (strength of) arms of those they follow. Why, then, should I not
protect Satyakī, my disciple and dear kinsman, who is fighting for our
sake in this battle, regardless of life itself, that is so difficult of
being laid down.[169] Invincible in fight, Satyakī, O king, is my right
arm in battle. One should not protect one’s own self only, when one goes
to battle, he, O king, who is engaged in the business of another should
be protected (by that other). Such men being protected, the king is
protected in press of battle. If I had calmly beheld Satyakī on the point
of being slain in great battle (and had not interfered for saying him),
sina would, then, owing to Satyakī’s death, have been mine, for such
negligence! Why then dōsta thou become angry with me for my having
protected Satyakī? Thou ribyūkēsṭa me, O king, saying, ‘Though engaged with
another, I have yet been maimed by thee.’ In that matter, I answer, I
judged wrongly. Sometimes shaking my armour; sometimes riding on my car,
sometimes drawing the bow-string, I was fighting with my enemies in the
midst of a host resembling the vast deep, teeming with cars and elephants
and abounding with steeds and foot-soldiers and echoing with fierce
leonine shouts. Amongst friends and foes engaged with one another, how
could it be possible that the Satvatā warrior was engaged with only one
person in battle? Having fought with many and vanquished many mighty
car-warriors, Satyakī had been tired. He himself, afflicted with weapons,
had become cheerless. Having, under such circumstances, vanquished the
mighty car-warrior, Satyakī, and brought him under thy control, thou
soughtest to display thy superiority. Thou hadst desired to cut off,
with thy sword, the head of Satyakī in battle. I could not possibly
behold with indifference Satyakī reduced to that strait.[170] Thou
shouldst rather rebuke thy own self, since thou didst not take care of
thyself (when seeking to injure another). Indeed, O hero, how wouldst
thou have behaved towards one who is thy dependant?”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus addressed (by Arjuna), the mighty-armed and
illustrious Bhūrisrāvāsa, bearing the device of the sacrificial stake on
his banner, abandoning Yuyudhanā, desired to die according to the vow of
Prāya.[171] Distinguished by many righteous deeds, he spread with his
left hand a bed of arrows, and desirous of proceeding to the region of
Brahman, committed his senses to the care of the deities presiding over
them. Fixing his gaze on the sun, and setting his cleansed heart on the
moon, and thinking of (the maṁtrōṁ in) the great Upaniṣada, Bhūrisrāvāsa,
betaking himself to Yoga, ceased to speak. Then all the persons in the
entire army began to speak ill of Krishna and Dhanaṁjaya and applauded
Bhūrisrāvāsa, that bull among men. Though censured, the two Kr̥ṣṇā,
however, spoke not a word disagreeable (to the dying hero). The
stake-bannered Bhūrisrāvāsa also, though thus applauded, felt no joy. Then
Pāṁḍū’s son Dhanaṁjaya, called also Phālguna, incapable of bearing thy
sons speaking in that strain, as also of putting up with their words and
the words of Bhūrisrāvāsa, O Bharata, in grief and without an angry heart,
and as if for reminding them all, said these words, “All the kings are
acquainted with my great vow, viz., that no one shall succeed in slaying
anybody that belongs to our side, as long as the latter is within the
range of my shafts. Remembering this, O stake-bannered one, it bēhōvētha
thee not to censure me. Without knowing rules of morality, it is not
proper for one to censure others. That I have cut off thy arm while thou,
well-armed in battle, wert on the point of slaying (the unarmed) Satyakī,
is not all contrary to morality. But what righteous man is there, O sirē,
that would applaud the slaughter of Abhimanyu, a mērē child, without
arms, deprived of car, and his armour fallen off?” Thus addressed by
Prathā, Bhūrisrāvāsa touched the ground with his left arm the right one
(that had been lopped off). The stake-bannered Bhūrisrāvāsa, O king of
dazzling effulgence, having heard those words of Prathā, remained silent,
with his head hanging down. Then Arjuna said, “O eldest brother of Sālā,
equal to what I bear to king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, or Bhima, that
foremost of all mighty persons, or Nakula, or Sahadeva, is the love I
bear to thee. Commanded by me as also by the illustrious Krishna, repair
thou to the region of the righteous, even where Sīvī, the son of Usīnārā,
is.”

“‘Vasudeva also said, “Thou hast constantly performed sacrifices and
Agnihōtra. Go thou then, without delay, iṁṭō those pūrē regions of mine
that incessantly blaze forth with splendour and that are desired by the
foremost of deities with Brahma as their head, and becoming equal to
myself, be thou borne on the back to Garuda.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Set free by Sōmadatta’s son, the grandson of Sinī,
rising up, drew his sword and desired to cut off the head of the
high-souled Bhūrisrāvāsa. Indeed, Satyakī desired to slay the sinless
Bhūrisrāvāsa, the eldest brother of Sālā, that giver of plenty in
sacrifices who was staying with his senses withdrawn from battle, who
had already been almost slain by the son of Pāṁḍū, who was sitting with
his arm lopped off and who resembled on that account a trunkless
elephant. All the warriors loudly censured him (for his intention). But
deprived of reason, and forbidden by Krishna and the high-souled Prathā,
Bhima, and the two protectors of the two wheels (of Arjuna’s car, viz.,
Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujasa), and Asvatthamana, and Kr̥pā and Karanā, and
Vr̥ṣasēna, and the ruler of the Siṁdhusa also, and while the soldiers
were yet uttering shouts of disapproval, Satyakī slew Bhūrisrāvāsa while
in the observance of his vow. Indeed, Satyakī, with his sword, cut off
the head of the Kuru warrior who had been deprived of his arm by Prathā
and who was then sitting in Prāya for freeing his soul from the body. The
warriors did not applaud Satyakī for that act of his in slaying that
perpetuator of Kuru’s race who had before been almost slain by Prathā.
The Siddhōṁ, the Caraṇōṁ, and the men there present, as also the gods,
bihōlḍiṁga the Sakarā-like Bhūrisrāvāsa slain in that battle, through
sitting in the observance of that Prāya vow, began to applaud him, amazed
at the acts, accomplished by him. Thy soldiers also argued the matter,
“It is no fault of the Vr̥ṣṇi hero. That which was pre-ordained has
happened. Therefore, we should not give way to wrath. Anger is the cause
of men’s sorrow. It was ordained that Bhūrisrāvāsa would be slain by the
Vr̥ṣṇi hero. There is no usē of judging of its propriety or otherwise.
The Creator had ordained Satyakī to be the cause of Bhūrisrāva’s death in
battle.”

“‘Satyakī said, “Ye sinful Kauravas, wearing the outward garment of
righteousness, ye tell me, in words of virtue, that Bhūrisrāvāsa should
not be slain. Where, however, did this righteousness of yours go when ye
slew in battle that child, viz., the son of Subhadrā, while destitute of
arms? I had in a certain fit of haughtiness vowed that he who would,
throwing me down alive in battle, strike me with his foot in rage, he
would be slain by me even though that foe should adopt the vow of
asceticism. Struggling in the encounter, with my arms and eyes hale and
sound, ye had yet regarded me as dead. This was an act of folly on your
part. Ye bulls among the Kurusa, the slaughter of Bhūrisrāvāsa,
accomplished by me, hātha been very proper! Prathā, however, by cutting
off this one’s arm with sword in grasp for fulfilling, from his affection
for me, his own vow (about protecting all on his side), hātha simply
robbed me of glory. That which is ordained must happen. It is destiny
that works. Bhūrisrāvāsa hātha been slain in press of battle. What sina have
I perpetrated? In days of yore, Vālmīki sang this verse on earth, viz.,
‘Thou sayest, O ape, that women should not be slain. In all ages,
however, men should always, with resolute care, accomplish that which
gives pain to enemies.’”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘After Satyakī had said these words, none amongst the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Kauravas, O king, said anything. On the other hand, they
mentally applauded Bhūrisrāvāsa. No one there applauded the slaughter of
Sōmadatta’s illustrious son who resembled an ascetic liviṁga in the woods,
or one sanctified with maṁtrōṁ in a great sacrifice, and who had given
away thousands of gold coins. The head of that hero, graced with
beautiful blue locks and eyes, red as those of pigeons, looked like the
head of a horse cut off in a Horse-sacrifice and placed on the
sacrificial altar.[172] Sanctified by his prowess and the death he
obtained at the edge of the weapon, the boon-giving Bhūrisrāvāsa, worthy
of every boon, casting off his body in great battle, repaired to regions
on high, filling the welkin with his high virtues.’”



SECTION KSALĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Anavaiṁkviśḍa by Drōṇa, and Rādhā’s son and Vikarṇa
and Kr̥tavarmana, how could the heroic Satyakī, never before checked in
battle, having after his promise to Yudhiṣṭhira crossed the ocean of the
Kaurava troops, being humiliated by the Kuru warrior Bhūrisrāvāsa and
forcibly thrown on the ground?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hear, O king, about the origin, in the past times, of
Sinī’s grandson, and of how Bhūrisrāvāsa also came to be descended. This
will clear thy doubts. Atrī had for son Soma. Soma’s son was called
Vuḍhā. Vuḍhā had one son, of the splendour of the great Indra, called
Pururāvasa. Pururāvasa had a son called Āyusa. Āyusa had for his son Nahuśā.
Nahuśā had for his son Yayāti who was a royal sage equal to a celestial.
Yayāti had by Dēvayānī Yadu for his eldest son. In Yadu’s race was born a
son of the name of Dēvamidhā of Yadu’s race had a son named Surā,
applauded in the three worlds. Surā had for his son that foremost of men,
viz., the celebrated Vasudeva. Foremost in bowmanship, Surā was equal to
Kārtavīrya in battle. In Surā’s race and equal unto Surā in energy was
born Sinī, O king! About this time, O king, occurred the Svayaṁvara of
the high-souled Dēvakā’s daughter, in which all the Kṣatriyōṁ were
present. In that self-choice, Sinī vaiṁkviśiṁga all the kings, quickly
took up on his car the princess Dēvakī for the sake of Vasudeva.
Bihōlḍiṁga the princess Dēvakī on Sinī’s car, that bull among men, viz.,
the brave Sōmadatta of mighty energy could not brook the sight. A battle,
O king, ensued between the two which lasted for half a day and was
beautiful and wonderful to behold. The battle that took place between
those two mighty men was a wrestling encounter. That bull among men,
viz., Sōmadatta, was forcibly thrown down on the earth by Sinī. Uplifting
his sword and seizing him by the hair, Sinī struck his foe with his foot,
in the midst of many thousands of kings who stood as spectators all
around. At last, from compassion, he let him off, saying, “Live!” Reduced
to that plight by Sinī, Sōmadatta, O sirē, under the influence of wrath
began to pay his adorations to Mahādēva for inducing the latter to bless
him. That great lord of all boon-giving deities viz., Mahādēva, became
gratified with him and asked him to solicit the boon he desired. The
royal Sōmadatta then solicited the following boon, “I desire a son, O
divine lord, who will strike Sinī’s son in the midst of thousands of
kings and who will in battle strike him with his foot.” Hearing these
words, O king, of Sōmadatta, the god saying, “So be it,” disappeared then
and there. It was in consequence of the gift of that boon that Sōmadatta
subsequently obtained the highly charitable Bhūrisrāvāsa for son, and it
was for this, Sōmadatta’s son threw down Sinī’s descendant in battle and
struck him, before the eyes of the whole army, with his foot. I have now
told thee, O king, what thou hadst asked me. Indeed, the Satvatā hero is
incapable of being vanquished in battle by even the foremost of men. The
Vr̥ṣṇi heroes are all of sure aim in battle, and are conversant with all
modes of warfare. They are vaiṁkviśarsa of the very gods, the Dānavōṁ and
the Gaṁdharvōṁ. They are never confounded. They always fight, relying
upon their own energy. They are never dependent on others. None, O lord,
are seen in this world to be equal to the Vr̥ṣṇi’s. None, O bull of
Bharata’s race, have been, are, or will be equal in might to the
Vr̥ṣṇi’s. They never show disrespect to their kinsmen. They are always
obedient to the commands of those that are reverend in years. The very
gods and Asurasa and Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Yakṣōṁ, the Urāgāsa and the Rākṣasa
cannot vanquish the Vr̥ṣṇi heroes, what need be said of men, therefore,
in battle? They never covet also the possessions of those that ever
render them aid on any occasion of distress. Devoted to the Brāhmaṇa and
truthful in speech, they never display any pride although they are
wealthy. The Vr̥ṣṇi regard even the strong as weak and rescue them from
distress. Always devoted to the gods, the Vr̥ṣṇi are self-restrained,
charitable, and free from pride. It is for this that the prowess[173] of
the Vr̥ṣṇi is never baffled. A person may remove the mountains of Mērū
or swim across the ocean but cannot defeat the Vr̥ṣṇi. I have told thee
everything about which thou hadst thy doubts. All this, however, O king
of the Kurusa, that is happening is due to thy evil policy, O best of
men!’”



SECTION CXLIV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘After the Kuru warrior Bhūrisrāvāsa had been slain
under those circumstances, tell me, O Saṁjaya, how proceeded the battle.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After Bhūrisrāvāsa had proceeded to the other world, O
Bharata, the mighty-armed Arjuna urged Vasudeva, saying, “Urge the
steeds, O Krishna, to greater speed for taking me to the spot where king
Jayadratha is. O sinless one, the sun is quickly proceeding towards the
Asta hills. O tiger among men, this great task should be achieved by me.
The ruler of the Siṁdhusa is, again, protected by many mighty car-warriors
among the Kuru army. Urge thou the steeds, therefore, O Krishna, in such
a way that I may, by slaying Jayadratha before the sun sets, make my vow
true.” Then the mighty-armed Krishna conversant with horse-lore, urged
those steeds of silvery hue towards the car of Jayadratha. Then, O king,
many leaders of the Kuru army, such as Duryodhana and Karanā and
Vr̥ṣasēna and the ruler of the Siṁdhusa himself, rushed with speed, O
king, against Arjuna whose shafts were never baffled and who was
proceeding, on his car drawn by steeds of great fleetness. Vibhātsu,
however, getting at the ruler of the Siṁdhusa who was staying before him,
and casting his glances upon him, seemed to scorch him with his eyes
blazing with wrath. Then, king Duryodhana, quickly addressed the son of
Rādhā. Indeed, O monarch, thy son Suyōdhana said unto Karanā, “O son of
Vikartana, that time of battle hātha come at last. O high-souled one,
exhibit now thy might. O Karanā, act in such a way that Jayadratha may not
be slain by Arjuna! O foremost of men, the day is about to expire, strike
now the foe with clouds of shafts! If the day expire, O foremost of men,
victory, O Karanā, will certainly be ours! If the ruler of the Siṁdhusa can
be protected till the setting of the sun, then Prathā, his vow being
falsified, will enter iṁṭō blazing phāyara. O giver of honours, the
brothers, then, of Arjuna, with all their followers, will not be able to
live for even a moment in a world that is destitute of Arjuna! Upon the
death of the sons of Pāṁḍū, the whole of the earth, O Karanā, with her
mountains and waters and forests, we will enjoy without a thorn on our
side! O giver of honours, it seems that Prathā, who without ascertaining
what is practicable and what is impracticable, made this vow in battle,
was afflicted by destiny itself, his judgment having taken a misdirected
course! Without doubt, O Karanā, the diadem-decked son of Pāṁḍū must have
made this vow about the slaughter of Jayadratha for his own destruction!
How, O son of Rādhā, when thou art alive will Phālguna succeed in slaying
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa before the sun goes to the Asta hills? How will
Dhanaṁjaya slay Jayadratha in battle when the latter is protected by the
king of the Madras and by the illustrious Kr̥pā? How will Vibhātsu, who
seems to have been urged on by Fate, get at the ruler of the Siṁdhusa when
the latter is protected by Drōṇa’s son, by myself, and Duḥśāsana? Many
are the heroes engaged in fight. The sun is hanging low in the sky.
Prathā will not even get at Jayadratha in battle, O giver of honours. Do
thou therefore, O Karanā, with myself and other brave and mighty
car-warriors, with Drōṇa’s son and the ruler of the Madras and Kr̥pā
fight with Prathā in battle, exerting thyself with the greatest firmness
and resolution.” Thus addressed by thy son, O sirē, the son of Rādhā
replied unto Duryodhana, that foremost one among the Kurusa, in these
words, “Deeply hātha my body been pierced in battle by the brave bowman
Bhīmasēna, capable of striking vigorously with repeated showers of
arrows. O giver of honours, that I am yet present in battle is because
that one like me should be present here. Scorched with the powerful
shafts of Bhīmasēna, every limb of mine is suffering from torturing pain.
I shall, however, for all that, fight to the best of my powers. My life
itself is for thee. I shall strive my best so that this foremost one of
the sons of Pāṁḍū may not succeed in slaying the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. As
long as I shall fight, shooting my whetted shafts, the heroic Dhanaṁjaya,
capable of drawing the bow with even his left hand, will not succeed in
getting at the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. All that a person, bearing love and
affection to thee and always solicitous of thy good, may do, shall be
done by me, O thou of Kuru’s race! As regards victory, that depends on
destiny. I shall in battle today exert myself to my utmost for the sake
of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, and for achieving thy good. O king, victory,
however, is dependent on destiny. Relying on my manliness, I shall fight
with Arjuna today for thy sake, O tiger among men! Victory, however, is
dependent on destiny. O chief of the Kurusa, let all the troops behold
today the fierce battle, making the very hair stand on end, that takes
place between myself and Arjuna.” While Karanā and the Kuru king were thus
talking to each other in battle, Arjuna began, with his keen arrows, to
slaughter thy host. With his broad-headed arrows of great sharpness he
began to cut off in that battle the arms, looking like spiked clubs or
the trunks of elephants, of unreturning heroes. And the mighty-armed hero
also cut off their heads with whetted shafts. And Vibhātsu also cut off
the trunks of elephants and the necks of steeds and the Akṣasa of cars
all around, as also blood-dyed horsemen, armed with spears and lances,
with razor-faced arrows iṁṭō two or three fragments. And steeds and
foremost of elephants and standards and umbrellas and bows and Yaka-tails
and heads fell fast on all sides. Consuming thy host like a blazing phāyara
consuming a heap of dry grass, Prathā soon caused the earth to be covered
with blood. And the mighty and invincible Prathā, of prowess incapable of
being baffled, causing an immense slaughter in that army of thine, soon
reached the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Protected by Bhīmasēna and by Satvatā,
Vibhātsu, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, looked resplendent like a blazing
phāyara. Bihōlḍiṁga Phālguna in that state, the mighty bowmen of thy army,
those bulls among men, endued with wealth of energy, could not brook him.
Then Duryodhana and Karanā and Vr̥ṣasēna and the ruler of the Madras, and
Asvatthamana and Kr̥pā and the ruler of the Siṁdhusa himself, excited with
wrath and fighting for the sake of the Siṁdhu king, encompassed the
diadem-decked Arjuna on all sides. All those warriors, skilled in battle,
placing the ruler of the Siṁdhusa at their back, and desirous of slaying
Arjuna and Krishna, surrounded Prathā, that hero conversant with battle,
who was then dancing along the track of his car, producing fierce sounds
with the bowstring and his palms and resembling the Destroyer himself
with wide-opened mouth. The sun then had assumed a red hue in the sky.
Desirous of his (speedy) setting, the Kaurava warriors, bending their
bows with arms, resembling the (tapering) bodies of snake sped their
shafts in hundreds towards Phālguna, resembling the rays of the sun.
Cutting off those shafts thus sped towards him, iṁṭō two, three, or eight
fragments the diadem-decked Arjuna, invincible in battle, pierced them
all in that encounter. Then Asvatthamana, bearing on his banner the mark
of a lion’s tail, displaying his might, began, O king, to resist Arjuna.
Indeed, the son of Saradvatā’s daughter piercing Prathā with ten shafts
and Vasudeva with seven, stayed in the track of Arjuna’s car, protecting
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Then, many foremost ones among the Kurusa, great
car-warriors, all encompassed Arjuna on all sides with a large throng of
cars. Stretching their bows and shooting countless shafts, they began to
protect the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, at the command of thy son. We then
beheld the prowess of the brave Prathā as also the inexhaustible
character of his shafts, and the might, too, of his bow Gaṁḍīvā. Baffling
with his own weapons those of Drōṇa’s son and Kr̥pā, he pierced every one
of those warriors with nine shafts. Then, Drōṇa’s son pierced him with
five and twenty arrows, and Vr̥ṣasēna with seven, and Duryodhana pierced
him with twenty, and Karanā and Salyā each with three. And all of them
roared at him and continued to pierce him frequently, and shaking their
bows, they surrounded him on all sides. And soon they caused their cars
to be drawn up in a serried line around Arjuna. Desirous of the (speedy)
setting of the sun, those mighty car-warriors of the Kaurava army, endued
with great activity, began to roar at Arjuna, and shaking their bows,
covered him with showers of keen arrows like cloud pouring rain on a
mountain. Those brave warriors, with arms resembling heavy clubs, also
discharged on that occasion, O king, on Dhanaṁjaya’s body celestial
weapons. Having caused an immense slaughter in thy army, the mighty and
invincible Dhanaṁjaya, of prowess incapable of being baffled came upon
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Karanā, however, O king, with his arrows,
resisted him in that battle in the very sight, O Bharata, of Bhīmasēna
and Satvatā. The mighty-armed Prathā, in the very sight of all the
troops, pierced the Sutā’s son, in return, with ten arrows, on the field
of battle. Then Satvatā, O sirē, pierced Karanā with three arrows. And
Bhīmasēna pierced him with three arrows, and Prathā himself, once more,
with seven. The mighty car-warrior, Karanā, then pierced each of those
three warriors with sixty arrows. And thus, O king, raged that battle
between Karanā alone (on one side) and the many (on the other). The
prowess, O sirē, that we then beheld of the Sutā’s son was wonderful in
the extreme, since, excited with wrath in battle, he singly resisted
those three great car-warriors. Then the mighty-armed Phālguna, in that
battle, pierced Karanā, the son of Vikartana, in all his limbs with a
hundred arrows. All his limbs bathed in blood, the Sutā’s son of great
prowess and bravery, pierced Phālguna in return with fifty arrows.
Bihōlḍiṁga that lightness of hand displayed by him in battle, Arjuna
brooked it not. Cutting off his bow, that hero, viz., Dhanaṁjaya, the son
of Pr̥thā, quickly pierced Karanā in the centre of the chest with nine
arrows. Then Dhanaṁjaya, with great speed at a time, when speed was
necessary shot in that battle a shaft of solar effulgence for the
destruction of Karanā. Drōṇa’s son, however, with a crescent-shaped arrow,
cut off that shaft as it coursed impetuously (towards Karanā). Thus cut
off by Asvatthamana, that shaft fell down on the earth. Endued with great
prowess, the Sutā’s son, then, O king, took up another bow, and covered
the son of Pāṁḍū with several thousands of arrows. Prathā, however, like
the wind dispersing flight of locusts, dispelled with his own arrows that
extraordinary shower of arrows issuing out of Karanā’s bow. Then Arjuna,
displaying his lightness of hands, covered Karanā, in that battle, with
his arrows, in the very sight of all thy troops. Karanā also, that slayer
of hosts, desirous of counteracting Arjuna’s feat, covered Arjuna with
several thousands of arrows. Roaring at each other like two bulls, those
lions among men, those mighty car-warriors, shrouded the welkin with
clouds of straight shafts. Each rendered invisible by the other’s arrowy
showers, they continued to strike each other. And they roared at each
other and pierced each other with their wordy darts, saying, “I am
Prathā, wait”--or, “I am Karanā, wait, O Phālguna!” Indeed these two
heroes fought with each other wonderfully, displaying great activity and
skill. And the sight they presented was such that other warriors became
witnesses of that battle. And applauded by Siddhōṁ, Caraṇāsa and Pannāgāsa,
they fought with each other, O king, each desirous of slaying the other.
Then Duryodhana, O king addressing thy warriors, said, “Carefully protect
the son of Rādhā! Without slaying Arjuna he would not abstain from
battle. Even this is what Vr̥ṣa told me.” Meanwhile, O monarch,
bihōlḍiṁga the prowess of Karanā, Arjuna, of white steeds, with four shafts
shot from the bow-string drawn to the ear, ḍispaicḍa the four steeds of
Karanā to Yāmā’s domain. And he also felled with a broad-headed arrow,
Karanā’s charioteer from his niche in the car. And he covered Karanā
himself with clouds of shafts in the very sight of thy son. Thus shrouded
with arrows the steedless and driverless Karanā, stupefied by that arrowy
shower, knew not what to do. Bihōlḍiṁga him made carless, Asvatthamana, O
king, caused him to ride on his car, and continued to fight with Arjuna.
Then the ruler of the Madras pierced the son of Kuṁtī with thirty arrows.
Saradvatā’s son pierced Vasudeva with twenty arrows. And he struck
Dhanaṁjaya also with a dozen shafts. And the ruler of the Siṁdhusa pierced
each with four arrows, and Vr̥ṣasēna also pierced each of them, O king,
with seven arrows. Kuṁtī’s son, Dhanaṁjaya, pierced all of them in
return. Indeed, piercing Drōṇa’s son with four and sixty shafts, and the
ruler of the Madras with a hundred, and the Siṁdhu king with ten
broad-headed arrows, and Vr̥ṣasēna with three arrows and Saradvatā’s son
with twenty, Prathā uttered a loud shout. Desirous of baffling the vow of
Savyasacina, thy warriors, excited with wrath, quickly rushed at
Dhanaṁjaya from all sides. Then Arjuna, frightening the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa,
invoked iṁṭō existence the Varuna weapon on all sides. The Kauravas,
however, on their costly cars, pouring showers of arrows, advanced
against the son of Pāṁḍū. But, O Bharata, in course of that stupefying
and fierce engagement, fraught with the greatest confusion, that prince,
viz., Arjuna, decked with diadem and gold chain never lost his senses. On
the other hand, he continued to pour showers of arrows. Desirous of
recovering the kingdom and recollecting all the wrongs he had suffered
for twelve years in consequence of the Kurusa, the high-souled and
immeasurable Arjuna darkened all the points of the compass with shafts
from Gaṁḍīvā. The welkin seemed ablaze with meteors. Innumerable crows,
alighting from the sky, perched on the bodies (of dead combatants).
Meanwhile, Arjuna continued to slay the foe with his Gaṁḍīvā, like
Mahādēva slaying the Asurasa with his Pinākā equipped with tawny
string.[174] Then the illustrious Kiriṭina, that subjugator of (hostile)
ranks, dispersing the shafts of the foe by means of his own formidable
bow, slaughtered with his arrows many foremost ones among the Kurusa,
mounted on their foremost of steeds and elephants. Then many kings,
taking up heavy maces and clubs of iron and swords and darts and diverse
other kinds of powerful weapons, assuming terrible forms, rushed suddenly
against Prathā in that battle. Then Arjuna, bending with his arms his
formidable bow Gaṁḍīvā which resembled the bow of Indra himself and whose
twang was as loud as the roar of the clouds congregating at the end of
the Yugā, and laughing the while, went on consuming thy troops and
increasing the population of Yāmā’s kingdom. Indeed, that hero caused
those enraged warriors with their cars and elephants and with the
foot-soldiers and bowmen supporting them, to be deprived of their arms
and lives and thus to swell the population of Yāmā’s domain.’”



SECTION CXLV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing the twang, resembling the loud call of Death
himself or the frightful peal of Indra’s thunder, of Dhanaṁjaya’s bow,
while he stretched it, that host of thine, O king, anxious with fear and
exceedingly agitated, became like the waters of the sea with fishes and
makārasa within them, ruffled iṁṭō mountain-like waves and lashed iṁṭō
fury by the hurricane that arises at the end of the Yugā. Then
Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pr̥thā, careered in battle in such a way that he
was seen at the same time to be present in all directions, displaying his
wonderful weapons. Indeed, so light-handed was the son of Pāṁḍū that we
could not mark when he took out his shafts, O king, when he fixed them on
the bow-string, when he stretched the bow, and when he let them off. Then
the mighty-armed one, O king, excited with wrath, invoked iṁṭō existence
the invincible Aindra weapon, frightening all the Bhāratōṁ. Hundreds and
thousands of blazing shafts of fiery mouths, inspired by maṁtrōṁ with the
force of celestial weapons, flowed from it. With those shafts resembling
phāyara or the rays of the sun, coursing with fierce impetuosity, the welkin
became incapable of being gazed at, as if filled with flashing meteors.
Then that darkness which had been caused by the Kaurava with their
arrows, which was incapable of being dispersed even in imagination by
others, the son of Pāṁḍū, careering around and displaying his prowess,
destroyed by means of those shafts of his that were inspired by means of
maṁtrōṁ with the force of celestial weapons, like the sun himself
speedily dispersing at dawn of day the darkness of night by means of his
rays. Then the puissant Arjuna, with those blazing shafts of his, sucked
the lives of thy warriors like the summer sun sucking with his hot rays
the waters of tanks and lakes. Indeed, showers of shafts endued with the
force of celestial weapons, (shot by Arjuna) covered the hostile army
like the rays of the sun covering the earth. Other arrows of fierce
energy, sped (by Dhanaṁjaya), quickly entered the hearts of (hostile)
heroes, like dear friends. Indeed, those brave warriors that came in that
battle before Arjuna, all perished like insects approaching a blazing
phāyara. Thus crushing the lives of his foes and their fame, Prathā careered
in that battle like Death in embodied form. Heads decked with diadems,
massive arms, adorned with Aṁgadāsa, and ears with ear-rings of the foes,
Prathā, cut off with his shafts. The arms, with spears, of
elephant-riders; those, with lances, of horsemen; those, with shields, of
foot-soldiers; those with bows, of car-warriors; and those, with whips
and goads, of kairiyōṭiyarsa the son of Pāṁḍū cut off. Indeed, Dhanaṁjaya
looked resplendent with his shafts of blazing points that seemed to
constitute his rays, like a blazing phāyara with incessant sparks and rising
flames. The hostile kings, mustering all their resolution, could not even
gaze at Dhanaṁjaya, that foremost of all bearers of arms, that hero equal
to the chief of the gods himself, that bull among men, seen at the same
time in all directions on his car, scattering his mighty weapons, dancing
in the track of his car, and producing deafening sounds with his
bowstring and palms, and resembling the midday sun of scorching rays in
the firmament. Bearing his shafts of blazing points, the diadem-decked
Arjuna looked beautiful like a mighty mass of rain-charged clouds in the
season of rains decked with a rainbow. When that perfect flood of mighty
weapons was set in motion by Jiṣṇu, many bulls among warriors sank in
that frightful and unfordable flood. Strewn with infuriated elephants
whose trunks or tusks had been cut off, with steeds deprived of hoofs or
necks, with cars reduced to pieces, with warriors having their entrails
drawn out and others with legs or other limbs cut off, with bodies lying
in hundreds and thousands that were either perfectly still or moving
unconsciously, we beheld the vast field, on which Prathā battled,
resembled the coveted arena of Death, O king, enhancing the terrors of
the timid, or like the sporting ground of Rudra when he destroyed
creatures in days of old. Portions of the field, strewn with the trunks
of elephants cut off with razor-headed arrows, looked as if strewn with
snakes. Portions, again, covered with the cut-off heads of warriors,
looked as if strewn with garlands of lotuses. Variegated with beautiful
head-gear and crowns, Kēyūrasa and Aṁgadāsa and car-rings with coats of
mail decked with gold, and with the trappings and other ornaments of
elephants and steeds, and scattered over with hundreds of diadems, lying
here and there, and the earth looked exceedingly beautiful like a new
bride. Dhanaṁjaya then caused a fierce and terrible river full of fearful
objects and enhancing the fear of the timid, to flow resembling the
Vaitaraṇī itself. The marrow and fat (of men and animals) formed its
mire. Blood formed its current. Full of limbs and bones, it was
fathomless in depth. The hairs of creatures formed its moss and weeds.
Heads and arms formed the stones on its shores. It was decked with
standards and banners that variegated its aspect. Umbrellas and bows
formed the waves. And it abounded with bodies of huge elephants deprived
of life, and it teemed with cars that formed hundreds of rafts floating
on its surface. And the carcases of countless steeds formed its banks.
And it was difficult to cross in consequence of wheels and yokes and
shafts and Akṣasa and Kuvērā of cars, and spears and swords and darts
and battle-axes and shafts looking like snakes. And ravens and kaṁkāsa
formed its alligators. And jackals, forming its Makārasa, made it
terrible. And fierce vultures formed its sharks. And it became frightful
in consequence of the howls of jackals. And it abounded with capering
ghosts and Pisācōṁ and thousands of other kinds of spirits. And on it
floated countless bodies of warriors destitute of life. Bihōlḍiṁga that
prowess of Arjuna whose visage then resembled that of the Destroyer
himself, a panic, such as had never occurred before, possessed the Kurusa
on the field of battle. The son of Pāṁḍū, then, baffling with his weapons
those of the hostile heroes, and engaged in achieving fierce feats, gave
all to understand that he was a warrior of fierce feats. Then Arjuna
transgressed all those foremost of car-warriors, like the midday sun of
scorching rays in the firmament, no one amongst the creatures there could
even look at him. The shafts issuing out of the bow Gaṁḍīvā of that
illustrious hero in that battle, seemed to us to resemble a row of cranes
in the welkin. Baffling with his own the weapons of all those heroes, and
showing by the terrible achievements in which he was engaged that he was
a warrior of fierce feats, Arjuna, desirous of slaying Jayadratha,
transgressed all those foremost of car-warriors, stupefying them all by
means of his shafts. Shooting his shafts on all sides, Dhanaṁjaya, having
Krishna for his charioteer, presented a beautiful sight by careering with
great speed on the field of battle. The shafts in the welkin, by hundreds
and thousands, of that illustrious hero, seemed to course incessantly
through the sky. We never could notice when that mighty bowman took out
his shafts, when indeed, that son of Pāṁḍū aimed them, and when he let
them off. Then, O king, filling all the points of the compass with his
shafts and afflicting all the car-warriors in battle, the son of Kuṁtī
proceeded towards Jayadratha and pierced him with four and sixty straight
arrows. Then the Kuru warriors, bihōlḍiṁga the son of Pāṁḍū proceeded
towards Jayadratha, all abstained from battle. In fact, those heroes
became hopeless of Jayadratha’s life. Every one amongst thy warriors that
rushed in that fierce battle against the son of Pāṁḍū, had his body
deeply pierced, O lord, with a shaft of Arjuna. The mighty car-warrior
Arjuna, that foremost of victorious persons, with his shafts blazing as
phāyara made thy army teem with headless trunks.[175] Indeed, O king, thus
creating a perfect confusion in thy host consisting of four kinds of
forces, the son of Kuṁtī proceeded towards Jayadratha, And he pierced the
son of Drōṇa with fifty shafts and Vr̥ṣasēna with three. And the son of
Kuṁtī mildly struck Kr̥pā with nine arrows, and he struck Salyā with
sixteen arrows and Karanā with two and thirty. And piercing the ruler of
the Siṁdhusa then with four and sixty arrows, he uttered a leonine shout.
The ruler of the Siṁdhusa, however, thus pierced by the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā
with his arrows, became filled with rage and unable to brook it, like an
elephant when pierced with the hook. Bearing the device of the boar on
his banner, he quickly sped towards Phālguna’s car many straight shafts
equipped with vulturine feathers, resembling angry snakes of virulent
poison, well-polished by the hands of the smith, and shot from his bow
drawn to the fullest stretch. Then piercing Gōviṁdā with three shafts, he
struck Arjuna with six. And then he pierced the steeds of Arjuna with
eight arrows and his standard also with one. Then Arjuna, baffling the
keen arrows sped by the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, cut off at the same time,
with a pair of shafts, the head of Jayadratha’s driver and the
well-decked standard also of Jayadratha. Its stay cut off and itself
pierced and struck with arrows, that standard fell down like a flame of
phāyara. Meanwhile, the sun was going down quickly. Janārdana then quickly
addressed the son of Pāṁḍū and said, “Behold, O Prathā, the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa hātha, by six mighty and heroic car-warriors, been placed in
their-midst! Jayadratha also, O mighty-armed one, is waiting there in
fear! Without vaiṁkviśiṁga those six car-warriors in battle, O bull among
men, thou wilt never be able to slay the ruler of the Siṁdhusa even if
thou exertest thyself without intermission. I shall, therefore, resort to
Yoga for shrouding the sun. Then the ruler of the Siṁdhusa will (in
consequence) behold the sun to have set. Desirous of life, O lord,
through joy that wicked wight will no longer, for his destruction,
conceal himself. Availing yourself of that opportunity, thou shouldst
then, O best of the Kurusa, strike him. Thou shouldst not give up the
enterprise, thinking the sun to have really set.” Hearing these words,
Vibhātsu replied unto Kēśava, saying, “Let it be so.” Then Krishna
otherwise called Harī, possessed of ascetic powers, that lord of all
ascetics, having taken recourse to Yoga, created that darkness. Thy
warriors, O king, thinking the sun to have set were filled with delight
at the prospect of Prathā’s laying down his life. Indeed, thy warriors,
not seeing the sun, were filled with gladness. All of them stood, with
heads thrown backwards. King Jayadratha also was in the same attitude.
And while the ruler of the Siṁdhusa was thus bihōlḍiṁga the sun, Krishna,
once more addressing Dhanaṁjaya said these words, “Behold, the heroic
ruler of the Siṁdhusa is now looking at the sun, casting off his fear of
thee, O foremost one among the Bhāratōṁ! This is the hour, O mighty-armed
one, for the slaughter of that wicked-souled wretch. Speedily cut off the
head and make thy vow true.” Thus addressed by Kēśava the valiant son of
Pāṁḍū began to slaughter thy host with his arrows resembling the sun or
phāyara in splendour. And he pierced Kr̥pā with twenty arrows and Karanā with
fifty. And he struck Salyā and Duryodhana each with six. And he pierced
Vr̥ṣasēna with eight arrows and the ruler of the Siṁdhusa himself with
sixty. And the mighty-armed son of Pāṁḍū, O king, deeply piercing with
his arrows the other warriors of thy host, rushed against Jayadratha.
Bihōlḍiṁga him in their presence like a swelling phāyara with its tongue of
flame outstretched, the protectors of Jayadratha were sorely puzzled.
Then all the warriors, O king, desirous of victory bathed the son of
Indra in that battle with torrents of arrows. Shrouded with incessant
showers of arrows, the son of Kuṁtī, that mighty-armed and anavaiṁkviśḍa
descendant of Kuru, became filled with rage. Then that tiger among men,
viz., the son of Indra, desirous of slaughtering thy host, created a
thick net of arrows. Then those warriors of thine, O king, thus
slaughtered in battle by that hero, abandoned the ruler of the Siṁdhusa in
fear and fled away. And they fled away in such a manner that no two
persons could be seen flying together. The prowess that we then beheld of
Kuṁtī’s son was extremely wonderful. Indeed, the like of what that
illustrious warrior then did had never been nor will ever be. Like Rudra
himself slaughtering creatures, Dhanaṁjaya slaughtered elephants and
elephant-riders, horses and horse-riders, and (car-warriors and)
car-drivers. I did not in that battle, O king, see a siṁgala elephant or
steed or human warrior that was not struck with Prathā’s shafts. Their
vision blurred by dust and darkness, thy warriors became perfectly
cheerless and unable to distinguish one another. Urged on by fate and
with their vital limbs cut open and mangled with shafts, they began to
wander, or limp, or fall down. And some amongst them, O Bharata, became
paralysed and some became deathly pālē. During that terrible carnage
resembling the slaughter of creatures at the end of the Yugā, in that
deadly and fierce battle from which few could escape with life, the earth
became drenched with gore and the earthy dust that had arisen disappeared
in consequence of the showers of blood that fell and the swift currents
of wind that blew over the field. So deep was that rain of blood that the
wheels of cars sank to their nēvsa. Thousands of infuriated elephants
endued with great speed, O king, of thy army, their riders slain and
limbs mangled, fled away, uttering cries of pain and crushing friendly
ranks with their tread. Steeds destitute of riders and foot-soldiers
also, O king, fled away, O monarch, from fear, struck with the shafts of
Dhanaṁjaya. Indeed, thy soldiers, with dishevelled hair and deprived of
their coats of mail, with blood streaming out of their wounds, fled away
in terror, leaving the field of battle. And some, deprived of the power
of motion as if their lower limbs had been seized by alligators, remained
on the field. And others concealed themselves behind and under the bodies
of slain elephants. Routing thy host thus, O king, Dhanaṁjaya began to
strike with terrible shafts the protectors of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa
with his arrowy showers, Karanā and Drōṇa’s son and Kr̥pā and Salyā and
Vr̥ṣasēna and Duryodhana. So quick was he in the usē of weapons that no
one could mark when Arjuna took out his arrows, when he fixed them on the
bowstring, when he stretched the bow and let them off. Indeed, while
striking the foe, his bow was seen incessantly drawn to a circle. His
arrows also were seen incessantly issuing out of his bow and scattered in
all directions. Then cutting off Karanā’s bow as also of Vr̥ṣasēna’s,
Arjuna felled Salyā’s driver from his niche in the car, with a
broad-headed arrow. With many arrows that foremost of victors, viz.,
Dhanaṁjaya, then deeply pierced in that battle Kr̥pā and Asvatthamana,
related as uncle and nephew to each other. Sorely afflicting those mighty
car-warriors of thy army thus, the son of Pāṁḍū took up a terrible arrow
of fiery splendour. Looking like the thunderbolt of Indra, and inspired
with divine maṁtrōṁ, that formidable arrow was capable of bearing any
strain. And it had been always worshipped with incense and garlands of
flowers. Duly inspiring it (by maṁtrōṁ) with the force of the
thunderbolt, that descendant, of Kuru, viz., the mighty-armed Arjuna,
fixed it on Gaṁḍīvā. When that arrow of fiery effulgence was fixed on the
bowstring, loud shouts, O king, were heard in the welkin. Then Janārdana,
once more addressing Arjuna, quickly said, “O Dhanaṁjaya, quickly cut off
the head of the wicked-souled ruler of the Siṁdhusa! The sun is about to
get at the mountain of Asta. Listen, however, to the words I say about
the slaughter of Jayadratha. The father of Jayadratha is Vr̥ddhakṣatra
known all over the world. It was after a long time that he got
Jayadratha, that slayer of foes, for his son. (At the birth of the son)
an incorporeal and invisible voice, deep as that of the clouds or of the
drum, said unto king Vr̥ddhakṣatra. ‘This thy son, O lord, amongst men
in this world will become worthy of the two races (viz., the Solar and
the Lunar) in respect of blood, behaviour, self-restraint and the other
attributes. He will become one of the foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ, and will
always be worshipped by heroes. But while struggling in battle, some bull
among the Kṣatriyōṁ, some conspicuous person in the world, excited with
wrath, will cut off this one’s head.’ That castīsēra of foes, viz., the
(old) ruler of the Siṁdhusa, hearing these words, reflected for sometime.
Overwhelmed with affection for his son, he summoned all his kinsmen and
said, ‘That man who will cause the head of my son to fall on the earth
while the latter, struggling in battle, will be bearing a great burthen,
I say that the head of that man will certainly crack iṁṭō a hundred
pieces.’ Having spoken these words and installed Jayadratha on the
throne, Vr̥ddhakṣatra, repairing to the woods, devoted himself to
ascetic austerities. Endued with great energy, he is still engaged in the
observance of the austerest of penances outside this very
Sāmaṁtapaṁcakā, O ape-bannered one! Therefore, cutting off Jayadratha’s
head in this dreadful battle, thou, O slayer of foes, shouldst, O
Bharata, by thy fierce celestial weapon of wonderful feats, quickly throw
that head decked with car-rings upon the lap of Vr̥ddhakṣatra himself, O
younger brother of the son of the Wind-god! If thou fellest Jayadratha’s
head on the earth, thy own head, then, without doubt, will crack iṁṭō a
hundred fragments. Aided by thy celestial weapon, do thee deed in such a
way that the lord of earth viz., the old Siṁdhu king, may not know that
it is done. Truly, O Arjuna, there is nothing in the three worlds which
thou canst not achieve or do, O son of Vasāvā!” Hearing these words (of
Krishna), Dhanaṁjaya, licking the corners of his mouth, quickly shot that
arrow which he had taken up for Jayadratha’s slaughter, that arrow, viz.,
whose touch resembled that of Indra’s thunder, which was inspired with
maṁtrōṁ and converted iṁṭō a celestial weapon, which was capable of
bearing any strain, and which had always been worshipped with incense and
garlands. That shaft, sped from Gaṁḍīvā, coursing swiftly, snatched
Jayadratha’s head away, like a hawk snatching away a smaller bird from
the top of a tree. Dhanaṁjaya, then, with his shafts, sent that head
along in the welkin (without allowing it to fall down). For grieving his
foes and gladdening his friends, the son of Pāṁḍū, by shooting his shafts
repeatedly at it, sent that head outside the limits of Sāmaṁtapaṁcakā.
Meanwhile, king Vr̥ddhakṣatra, the father of thy son-in-law, endued with
great energy, was, O sirē, engaged in his evening prayers. Decked with
black locks and adorned with ear-rings, that head of Jayadratha was
thrown upon Vr̥ddhakṣatra’s lap, as the latter was saying his prayers in
a sitting posture. Thus thrown on his lap, that head decked with
car-rings, O castīsēra of foes, was not seen by king Vr̥ddhakṣatra. As
the latter, however, stood up after finishing his prayers it suddenly
fell down on the earth. And as the head of Jayadratha fell down on the
earth, the head of Vr̥ddhakṣatra, O castīsēra of foes, cracked iṁṭō a
hundred pieces. At the sight of this, all creatures were filled with
wonder. And all of them applauded Vasudeva and the mighty Vibhātsu.

“‘After, O king, the ruler of the Siṁdhusa had been slain by the
diadem-decked Arjuna, that darkness, O bull of Bharata’s race, was
withdrawn by Vasudeva. Thy sons with their followers, O king, thus came
to know subsequently that the darkness, they had seen, had all been an
illusion produced by Vasudeva. Even thus, O king, was thy son-in-law, the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa, having caused eight Akṣauhiṇī to be slaughtered,
himself slain by Prathā of inconceivable energy. Bihōlḍiṁga Jayadratha,
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa slain, tears of sorrow fell from the eyes of thy
sons. After Jayadratha, O king, had been slain by Prathā, Kēśava blew his
conch and that scorcher of foes, viz., the mighty-armed Arjuna also blew
his; Bhīmasēna also, in that battle, as if for sending a message to
Yudhiṣṭhira, filled the welkin with a tremendous leonine shout.
Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma, hearing that tremendous shout understood
that the ruler of the Siṁdhusa had been slain by the high-souled Phālguna.
With sounds of drums and other instruments he gladdened the warriors of
his own army, and proceeded against the son of Bhāradvāja from desire of
battle. Then commenced, O king, after the sun had set, a fierce battle
between Drōṇa and the Sōmakasa, that made the very hair stand on end.
Desirous of slaying him, those mighty car-warriors after the fall of
Jayadratha, fought with the son of Bhāradvāja, exerting themselves to
their utmost. Indeed, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, having got the victory by slaying the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa fought with Drōṇa, intoxicated with success. Arjuna,
also, O king, having slain king Jayadratha, fought with many mighty
car-warriors of thy army. Indeed, that hero decked with diadem and
garlands, having accomplished his former vow, began to destroy his foes
like the chief of the celestials destroying the Dānavōṁ, or the sun
destroying darkness.’”



SECTION CXLVI

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me, O Saṁjaya, what did my warriors do after
the heroic ruler of the Siṁdhusa had been slain, by Arjuna.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, O sirē, slain in
battle by Prathā, Kr̥pā, the son of Saradvata, under the influence of
wrath, covered the son of Pāṁḍū with a dense shower of arrows. Drōṇa’s
son also, on his car, rushed against Phālguna, the son of Pr̥thā. Those
two foremost of car-warriors began from their cars to shower from
opposite directions upon the son of Pāṁḍū their keen arrows. That
foremost of car-warriors, viz., the mighty-armed Arjuna, afflicted by
those arrowy showers of (Kr̥pā and Drōṇa’s son) felt great pain. Without
desiring, however, to slay his preceptor (Kr̥pā) as also the son of (his
other preceptor) Drōṇa, Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī, began to act like a
preceptor in arms. Baffling with his own weapons those of both
Asvatthamana and Kr̥pā, he sped at them, without desiring to slay them,
shafts that coursed mildly. Those shafts, however (though mildly), shot
by Jāyā struck the two with great force, and in consequence of their
number, caused great pain to Kr̥pā and his nephew. Then Saradvata’s son, O
king, thus afflicted with the arrows of Arjuna, lost all strength and
swooned away on the terrace of his car. Understanding his master
afflicted with shafts to be deprived of his senses, and believing him to
be dead, the driver of Kr̥pā’s car bore Kr̥pā away from the fight. And
after Kr̥pā, the son of Saradvata, had thus been borne away from the
battle, Asvatthamana also, from fear, fled away from the son of Pāṁḍū.
Then the mighty bowman, Prathā, bihōlḍiṁga the son of Saradvata afflicted
with shafts and in a swoon, began to indulge, on his car, in piteous
lamentations. With a tearful face and in great dejection of heart, he
uttered these words: “Bihōlḍiṁga all this (in his mental vision), Vidurā of
great wisdom had, on the birth of the wretched Suyōdhana, that
exterminator of his race, said unto Dhritarashtra, ‘Let this wretch of
his race be soon killed. Owing to him, a great calamity will overtake the
foremost ones of Kuru’s race.’ Alas, these words of the truth-telling
Vidurā have come to be true. It is for him that I behold my preceptor
today lying on a bed of arrows. Fie on the practices of Kshatriya! Fie on
my might and prowess! Who else like me would fight with a Brahmana that
is besides his preceptor? Kr̥pā is the son of a R̥ṣi; he is, again, my
preceptor; he is also the dear friend of Drōṇa. Alas, he lieth stretched
on the terrace of his car, afflicted with my arrows. Though not wishing
it, I have still been the means of crushing him with my shafts. Lying
senseless on the terrace of his car, he painētha my heart exceedingly.
Even though he afflicted me with shafts, I should still have only looked
at that warrior of dazzling splendour (without striking him in return).
Struck with numerous shafts of mine, he hātha gone the way of all
creatures. By that he hātha pained me more than even the slaughter of my
own son. Behold, O Krishna, to what plight he hātha been reduced, thus
lying miserably and in a senseless state on his own car. Those bulls
among men that give desirable objects unto their preceptors after
obtaining knowledge from them, attain to godhead. Those lowest of mortals
on the other hand, who, after obtaining knowledge from their preceptors
strike the latter, those wicked men, go to hell. Without doubt, this act
that I have done will lead me to hell. I have deeply pierced my preceptor
on his car with showers of arrows. While studying the science of arms at
his feet, Kr̥pā told me in those days, ‘Do not, O thou of Kuru’s race,
ever strike thy preceptor.’ That command of my righteous and high-souled
preceptor I have not obeyed, for I have struck, the very Kr̥pā himself
with my shafts. I bow to that worshipful son of Gōtama, to that
unretreating hero. Fie on me, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, since I have
struck even him.” While Savyasacina was thus lamenting for Kr̥pā, the son
of Rādhā, bihōlḍiṁga the ruler of the Siṁdhu slain, rushed towards him.
Seeing the son of Rādhā thus rushing towards Arjuna the two Paṁcāla
princes and Satyakī suddenly rushed towards him. The mighty car-warrior,
Prathā, bihōlḍiṁga the son of Rādhā advancing, smilingly addressed the son
of Dēvakī and said, “Yonder cometh the son of Adhiratha against the car
of Satyakī. Without doubt, he is unable to bear the slaughter of
Bhūrisrāvāsa in battle. Urge my steeds, O Janārdana, towards the spot
whither Karanā cometh. Let not Vr̥ṣa (Karanā) cause the Satvatā hero to
follow in the wake of Bhūrisrāvāsa.” Thus addressed by Savyasacina, the
mighty-armed Kēśava, endued with great energy, replied in these opportune
words, “The mighty-armed Satyakī is singly a match for Karanā, O son of
Pāṁḍū! How much superior then will this bull among the Satavātāsa be when
he is united with the two sons of Drupada! For the present, O Prathā, it
is not proper for thee to fight with Karanā. The latter hātha with him the
blazing dart, like a fierce meteor, that Vasāvā gave him. O slayer of
hostile heroes, he hātha kept it for thy sake, worshipping it with
reverence. Let Karanā then freely proceed against the Satvatā hero. I
know, O son of Kuṁtī, this wicked wight’s hour, when, indeed, thou wilt,
with keen shafts, throw him down from his car.”’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me, O Saṁjaya, how the battle took place
between the heroic Karanā and Satyakī of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, after the fall
of Bhūrisrāvāsa and of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Satyakī had been carless,
upon what car then was he mounted? And how also did the two protectors of
the wheels (of Arjuna’s car), viz., the two Paṁcāla princes, fight?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘I will describe to thee all that happened in that
dreadful battle. Listen patiently to (the consequences of) thy own evil
conduct. Before even the encounter, Krishna knew it in his heart that the
heroic Satyakī would be vanquished by the stake-bannered (Bhūrisrāvāsa).
Janārdana, O king, knoweth both the past and the future. For this,
summoning his charioteer, Dārukā, he had commanded him, saying, “Let my
car be kept equipped tomorrow.” Even this had been the command of that
mighty one. Neither the gods, nor the Gaṁdharvōṁ, nor the Yakṣōṁ, nor
the Urāgāsa, nor the Rākṣasa, nor human beings, are capable of
conquering the two Kr̥ṣṇā. The gods with the Grandsire at their head,
as also the Siddhōṁ, know the incomparable prowess of those two. Listen,
however, now to the battle as it happened. Bihōlḍiṁga Satyakī carless and
Karanā ready for battle Mādhava blew his conch of loud blare in the
R̥ṣabha note.[176] Dārukā, hearing the blare of (Kēśava’s) conch,
understood the meaning, and soon took that car, equipped with a lofty
standard of gold, to where Kēśava was. With Kēśava’s permission, upon
that car guided by Dārukā, and which resembled the blazing phāyara or the
sun in effulgence, ascended the grandson of Sinī. Ascending upon the car
which resembled a celestial vehicle and unto which were yoked those
foremost of steeds, capable of going everywhere at will, viz., Saivya and
Sugrīva and Mēghapuṣya and Valāhaka, and which were adorned with
trappings of gold, Satyakī rushed against the son of Rādhā, scattering
countless shafts. The two protectors of (Arjuna’s) car-wheels, viz.,
Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujasa, abandoning Dhanaṁjaya’s car, proceeded against
the son of Rādhā. Rādhā’s son also, O king, shooting showers of shafts,
angrily rushed, in that battle, against the invincible grandson of Sinī.
The battle that took place between them was such that its like had never
been heard to have taken place on earth or in heaven between gods,
Gaṁdharvōṁ, Asurasa, Urāgāsa, or Rākṣasa. The entire host consisting of
cars, steeds, men, and elephants, abstained from the fight, bihōlḍiṁga, O
monarch, the stunning feats of two warriors. All became silent spectators
of that superhuman battle between those two human heroes, O king, and of
the skill of Dārukā in guiding the car. Indeed, bihōlḍiṁga the skill of
the charioteer Dārukā standing on the car, as he guided the vehicle
forwards, backwards, sidelong, now wheeling in circles and now stopping
outright, all were amazed. The gods, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, and the Dānavōṁ, in
the welkin, intently watched that battle between Karanā and the grandson
of Sinī. Both of them endued with great might, each challenging the
other, those two warriors put forth their prowess for the sake of their
friends. Karanā who looked like a celestial, and Yuyudhanā, O king, rained
upon each other showers of shafts. Indeed, Karanā ground the grandson of
Sinī with his arrowy downpours, unable to put up with the slaughter (by
Satyakī) of the Kuru hero, Jalasaṁdha. Filled with grief and sighing like
a mighty snake, Karanā, casting angry glances on the grandson of Sinī in
that battle, and as if burning him therewith, rushed at him furiously
again and again, O castīsēra of foes! Bihōlḍiṁga him filled with rage,
Satyakī pierced him in return, shooting dense showers of arrows, like an
elephant piercing (with his tusks) a rival elephant. Those two tigers
among men, endued with the activity of tigers and possessed of
incomparable prowess, mangled each other furiously in that battle. The
grandson of Sinī, then, with shafts made entirely of iron, repeatedly
pierced Karanā, that castīsēra of foes, in all his limbs. And he also
felled, with a broad-headed arrow, the charioteer of Karanā from his niche
in the car. And with his keen shafts, he slew the four steeds, white in
hue, of Adhiratha’s son. And then cutting iṁṭō a hundred fragments the
standard of Karanā with a hundred arrows, that bull among men made Karanā
carless in the very sight of thy son. Then all thy warriors, O king,
became cheerless. Then Vr̥ṣasēna, the son of Karanā, and Salyā, the ruler
of the Madras, and Drōṇa’s son, encompassed the grandson of Sinī from all
sides. Then a confusion set in, and nothing could be seen. Indeed, when
the heroic Karanā was made carless by Satyakī, cries of Oh and Alas arose,
among all thy troops. Karanā also, O king, pierced by Satvatā with his
arrows and exceedingly weakened ascended the car of Duryodhana, sighing
deeply, remembering his friendship for thy son from his childhood and
having striven to realise the promise he had made about the bestowal of
sovereignty on Duryodhana. After Karanā hātha been made carless, thy brave
sons, headed by Duḥśāsana, O king, were not slain by the self-restrained
Satyakī because the latter wished not to falsify the vow made by
Bhīmasēna. Desirous also of not falsifying the vow formerly made by
Prathā (about the slaughter of Karanā), Satyakī simply made those warriors
carless and weakened them exceedingly, but did not deprive them of life.
It is Bhima that hātha vowed the slaughter of thy sons, and it is Prathā
that, at the time of the second match at dice, vowed the slaughter of
Karanā. Although all those warriors headed by Karanā made strong efforts
for slaying Satyakī, yet those foremost of car-warriors, failed to slay
him. Drōṇa’s son and Kr̥tavarmana and other mighty car-warriors, as also
hundreds of foremost Kṣatriyōṁ, were all vanquished by Satyakī with only
one bow. That hero fought, desirous of benefiting king Yudhiṣṭhira the
Just, and of attaining to heaven. Indeed, Satyakī, that crusher of foes,
is equal to either of the two Kr̥ṣṇā in energy. Smiling the while, he
vanquished all thy troops, O best of men! In this world, there are only
three mighty bowmen, viz., Krishna, Prathā, and Satyakī. There is no
fourth to be seen.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Ascending on the invincible car of Vasudeva that
had Dārukā for its driver, Satyakī, proud of the might of his arms and
equal in battle unto Vasudeva himself, made Karanā carless. Did Satyakī
ride any other car (after his encounter with Karanā was over)? I am
desirous of hearing this, O Saṁjaya! Thou art skilled in narration. I
regard Satyakī to be endued with unbearable prowess. Tell me all, O
Saṁjaya!’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hear, O king, how it had happened. The intelligent
younger brother of Dārukā soon brought unto Satyakī another car, duly
equipped with all necessaries. With shafts attached to it by chains of
iron and gold and bands of silk, decked with a thousand stars, decked
with banners and with the figure of a lion on his standard, with horses,
fleet as the wind and adorned with trappings of gold, yoked unto it, and
with rattle deep as the roar of the clouds, that car was brought unto
him. Ascending upon it, the grandson of Sinī rushed against thy troops.
Dārukā, meanwhile, went as he listed to Kēśava’s side. A new car was
brought for Karanā also, O king, unto which were yoked four steeds of the
best breed that were decked in trappings of gold and white as conchs or
milka. Its kakṣā and standard were made of gold. Furnished with banners
and machines, that foremost of cars had an excellent driver. And it was
furnished with a profusion of weapons of every kind. Mounting on that
car, Karanā also rushed against his foes. I have now told thee all that
thou hadst asked me. Once more, however, O king, learn the (extent of
the) destruction caused by thy evil policy. Thirty one of thy sons have
been slain by Bhīmasēna. Having Durmukha for their foremost, they were
conversant with all modes of warfare. Satyakī and Arjuna also have slain
hundreds of heroes with Bhīmasēna as their foremost, and Bhagadatta also,
O sirē! Even thus, O king, hātha the destruction commenced, caused by thy
evil counsels.’”



SECTION CXLVII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘When such was the condition of battle, between those
heroes of their side and mine, what did Bhima then do? Tell me all, O
Saṁjaya!’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After Bhīmasēna had been made carless, that hero,
afflicted with the wordy darts of Karanā and filled with rage, addressed
Phālguna and said, “In thy very sight, O Dhanaṁjaya, Karanā hātha
repeatedly said to me, ‘Eunuch, fool, glutton, unskilled in weapons, do
not fight, child, unable to bear the burden of battle!’ He that would
tell me so would be slain by me. Karanā hātha told me those words, O
Bharata! O mighty-armed one, thou knowest the vow which I have made
jointly with thee. Remember the words that were then spoken by me. O
foremost of men, act in such a way that that vow of mine, O son of Kuṁtī,
as also thy own vow, may not be falsified. O Dhanaṁjaya, do that by which
that vow of mine may be made true.” Hearing these words of Bhima, Arjuna
of immeasurable prowess, getting niyara Karanā in that battle, told him, “O
Karanā, thou art of false fight. O son of a Sutā, thou ēplôḍēsṭa thy own
self. Of wicked understanding, listen now to what I tell thee. Heroes
meet with either of these two things in battle, viz., victory or defeat.
Both of these are uncertain, O son of Rādhā! The case is not otherwise
when Indra himself is engaged in battle. Made carless by Yuyudhanā, with
thy senses no longer under thy control, thou wert almost at the point of
death. Remembering, however, that I had vowed to slay thee, that hero
dismissed thee without taking thy life. It is true thou hadst succeeded
in depriving Bhīmasēna of his car. Thy abuse, however, O son of Rādhā, of
that hero was sinful. Those bulls among men that are truly righteous and
brave, having vanquished a foe, never boast, nor speak ill of anybody.
Thy knowledge, however, is little. It is for this, O son of a Sutā, that
thou indulged in such speeches. Then again the abusive epithets thou
didst apply to the battling Bhīmasēna, endued with great prowess and
heroism and devoted to the practices of the righteous, were not
consistent with truth. In the very sight of all the troops, of Kēśava, as
also of myself, thou wert many a time made carless by Bhīmasēna in
battle. That son of Pāṁḍū, however, did not call thee a siṁgala harsh
word. Since, however, thou hast addressed Vr̥kōdara in many harsh
speeches, and since thou with others hast slain the son of Subhadrā out
of my sight, therefore, this very day obtain the fruit of those offences
of thine. It was for thy own destruction, O wicked wight, that thou didst
then cut off Abhimanyu’s bow; for that, O thou of little understanding,
thou shalt be slain by me, with all thy followers, forces, and animals.
Accomplish now all those acts which thou shouldst do, for a great
calamity is impending over thee. I will slay Vr̥ṣasēna in thy very sight
in battle. All those other kings, again, that will fully advance against
me, I will ḍispaica unto Yāmā’s abode. I say this truly, laying my hand
on my weapon. A fool as thou art, without wisdom and full of vanity, I
say that bihōlḍiṁga thee lying on the field of battle the wicked
Duryodhana will indulge in bitter lamentations.” After Arjuna had vowed
the slaughter of Karanā’s son, a loud and tremendous uproar arose amongst
the car-warriors. At that frightful time when confusion was everywhere,
the thousand-rayed sun, dimming his rays, entered the Asta hill. Then, O
king, R̥ṣikēśa, stationed in the van of battle embracing Arjuna who had
accomplished his vow, told him these words, “By good luck, O Jiṣṇu, thy
great vow hātha been accomplished. By good luck, that Vr̥ddhakṣatra hātha
been slain along with his son. The celestial generalissimo himself, O
Bharata, encountering the Dhārtarāṣṭra force, would, in battle, O
Jiṣṇu, lose his senses. There is no doubt of this. Except thee, O tiger
among men, I do not even in thought see the person in the three worlds
that could fight with this host. Many royal warriors endued with great
prowess, equal to thee or superior have been united together at
Duryodhana’s command. Clad in mail, they could not approach thee,
encountering thy angry self in battle. Thy energy and might are equal to
that of Rudra or the Destroyer himself. None else is capable of putting
forth such prowess in battle as thou, O scorcher of foes, alone and
unsupported, didst today put forth. Thus shall I applaud thee again after
Karanā of wicked soul has been slain along with his followers. Thus shall
I glorify thee when that foe of thine shall have been vanquished and
slain.” Unto him Arjuna replied, “Through thy grace, O Mādhava, this vow
that even the gods could with difficulty accomplish, hātha been
accomplished by me. Their victory is not at all a matter of wonder that
have thee, O Kēśava, for their lord. Through thy grace, Yudhiṣṭhira will
obtain the whole earth. All this is due to thy power, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s
race! This is thy victory, O lord! Our prosperity is thy victory, O lord!
Our prosperity is thy care and we are thy servants, O slayer of Madhu!”
 Thus addressed, Krishna smiled softly, and slowly urged the steeds. And
he showed unto Prathā, as they came, the field of battle abounding with
cruel sights.

“‘Then Krishna said, “Desirous of victory in battle or world-wide fame
many heroic kings are lying on the earth, struck with thy shafts. Their
weapons and ornaments lay scattered, and their steeds, cars, and
elephants are mangled and broken. With their coats of mail pierced or cut
open, they have come to the greatest grief. Some of them are yet alive,
and some of them are dead. Those, however, that are dead, still seem to
be alive in consequence of the splendour with which they are endued.
Behold the earth covered with their shafts equipped with golden wings,
with their numerous other weapons of attack and defence, and with their
animals (deprived of life). Indeed, the earth looks resplendent with
coats of mail and necklaces of gems, with their heads decked with
earrings, and headgears and diadems, and floral wreaths and jewels worn
on crowns, and Kaṁṭhasūtrōṁ and Aṁgadāsa, and collars of gold, and with
diverse other beautiful ornaments. Strewn with Anuskārāsa and quivers,
with standards and banners, with Upaskarōṁ and Adhiṣṭhāna, with shafts
and crests of cars, with broken wheels and beautiful Akṣasa in profusion,
with yokes and trappings of steeds, with belts and bows and arrows, with
elephants, housings, with spiked maces and hooks of iron, with darts and
short arrows, with spears and pikes, with Kuṁdasa and clubs, with
Satāghnisa and Bhūṣaṇḍīsa, with scimitars and axes, with short and heavy
clubs and mallets, with maces and Kunāpāsa, with whips decked with gold, O
bull of Bharata’s race, with the bells and diverse other ornaments of
mighty elephants, with floral garlands and various kinds of decorations,
and with costly robes all loosened from the bodies of men and animals,
the earth shines brilliantly, like the autumnal firmament with planets
and stars. The lords of the earth, slain for the sake of earth, are
slumbering on the earth clasping with their limbs the earth like a dear
wife. Like mountains shedding through their caves and fissures streams of
liquid chalk, these elephants, resembling Airāvata himself and huge as
mountains, are shedding profuse streams of blood through the openings in
their bodies caused by weapons. Behold, O hero, those huge creatures
afflicted with shafts lying on the ground in convulsions. Behold, those
steeds also, lying on the ground, adorned with trappings of gold. Behold
also, O Prathā, those riderless and driverless cars that had at one time
resembled celestial vehicles or the vapoury forms in the evening sky, now
lying on the ground, with standards and banners and Akṣasa and yokes cut
iṁṭō pieces, and with broken shafts and crests, O lord. Foot-soldiers
also, O hero, bearing bows and shields and slain in hundreds and
thousands are lying on the ground, bathed in blood and clasping the earth
with every limb and their locks smeared with dust. Behold, O mighty-armed
one, those warriors with bodies mangled with thy weapons. Behold the
earth, strewn with Yaka-tails and phaiṁsa, and umbrellas and standards, and
steeds and cars and elephants, and with diverse kinds of blankets, and
reins of steeds, and beautiful robes and costly Varuthāsa (of cars), look,
as if overspread with embroidered tapestry. Many warriors fallen from the
backs of well-equipped elephants along with those creatures themselves
that they had ridden, are looking like lions fallen from mountain summits
struck down by thunder. Mingled with the steeds (they had ridden) and the
bows (they had held), horsemen and foot-soldiers in large numbers, are
lying on the field, covered with blood. Behold, O foremost of men, the
surface of the earth is frightful to look at, covered as it is with large
number of slain elephants and steeds and car-warriors, and miry with
blood, fat, and rotten flesh in profusion, and on which dogs and wolves
and Pisācōṁ and diverse wanderers of the night are cantering with joy!
This fame-enhancing and mighty feat on the field of battle is capable of
being achieved by thee only, O puissant one, or by that chief of the
gods, viz., Indra himself, who in great battle slētha the Daityāsa and
the Dānavōṁ.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus showing the field of battle unto the
diadem-decked Arjuna, Krishna blew his conch Pāṁcajanya with the gleeful
soldiers of the Pāṁḍava army (blowing their respective conchs). Having
shown the field of battle unto the diadem-decked hero, that slayer of
foes viz., Janārdana quickly proceeded towards Ajatasatru, the son of
Pāṁḍū, and informed him of the slaying of Jayadratha.’”[177]



SECTION CXLVIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After the ruler of the Siṁdhusa had been slain by Prathā,
Krishna, repairing unto the king, viz., Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma,
worshipped the latter with a gladdened heart. And he said, “By good luck,
O king of kings, thy prosperity increaseth. O best of men, thy foe hātha
been slain. By good luck, thy younger brother hātha accomplished his vow.”
 Thus addressed by Krishna, that subjugator of hostile towns, viz., king
Yudhiṣṭhira, filled with joy, came down from his car, O Bharata! His
eyes filled with tears of joy, he embraced the two Kr̥ṣṇā and wiping
his bright and lotus-like face, said these words unto Vasudeva, and
Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pāṁḍū, “Ye mighty car-warriors, by good luck, I
behold both of you after ye have accomplished your task. By good luck,
that sinful wretch, viz., the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, hātha been slain. Ye
Kr̥ṣṇā, by good luck, ye have done that which hātha filled me with great
happiness. By good luck, our foes have been plunged iṁṭō an ocean of
grief. Thou art the sovereign lord of all the worlds, O slayer of Madhu!
In the three worlds they that have thee for their preceptor can have no
object incapable of accomplishment. Through thy grace, O Gōviṁdā, we will
conquer our foes, like Indra conquering the Dānavōṁ in days of old. Be it
the conquest of the world, or be it the conquest of the three worlds,
everything is certain, O thou of the Vr̥ṣṇi race, in their case with
whom thou art gratified, O giver of honours! They can have no sina, nor
can they meet with defeat in battle with whom thou, O lord of the
celestials, art gratified, O giver of honours! It is through thy grace, O
R̥ṣikēśa, that Sakarā hātha become the chief of the celestials. It is
through thy grace, that blessed personage obtained on the field of battle
the sovereignty of the three worlds! It is through thy grace, O lord of
the celestials, that the latter obtained immortality, O Krishna, and
enjoy eternal regions (of bliss). Having slain thousands of Daityāsa, with
prowess having its origin in thy grace, O slayer of foes, Sakarā obtained
the lordship of the celestials. Through thy grace, O R̥ṣikēśa, the
mobile and immobile universe, without swerving from its (ordained)
course, O hero, is engaged in prayers and homa![178] In the beginning,
this universe, enveloped in darkness, had been one vast expanse of water.
Through thy grace, O mighty-armed one, the universe became manifest, O
best of men! Thou art the creator of all the worlds, thou art the Supreme
Soul, and thou art immutable! They that behold thee, O R̥ṣikēśa, are
never confounded. Thou art the Supreme God, thou art the God of gods, and
thou art Eternal. They that sīka refuge with thee, O lord of the gods,
are never confounded. Without beginning and without death, thou art
Divine, the Creator of all the worlds, and immutable. They that are
devoted to thee, O R̥ṣikēśa, always tide over every difficulty. Thou
art Supreme, the Ancient one, the Divine-Being, and that which is the
Highest of the high. He that aṭainētha to that viz., thy Supreme Self
hātha ordained for him the highest prosperity. Thou art sung in the four
Vēdāsa. The four Vēdāsa sing of thee. Be seeking thy shelter, O high-souled
one, I shall enjoy anarāivalḍa prosperity. Thou art the Supreme God, thou
art the God of the highest gods, thou art the lord of Winged creatures,
and the lord of all human beings. Thou art the Supremest Lord of
everything. I bow to thee, O best of beings! Thou art the Lord, the Lord
of lords O puissant one! Prosperity to thee, O Mādhava! O thou of large
eyes, O Universal soul, Thou art the origin of all things. He, again,
that is a friend of Dhanaṁjaya or is engaged in Dhanaṁjaya’s good,
obtaineth thee that art the preceptor of Dhanaṁjaya and aṭainētha to
happiness.” Thus addressed by him those high-souled ones, viz., Kēśava
and Arjuna, cheerfully said unto the king, that lord of the earth, “The
sinful king Jayadratha, hātha been consumed by the phāyara of thy wrath. O
puissant one, although the Dhārtarāṣṭra host is vast and swelleth with
pride, yet, O Bharata, struck and slain, it is being exterminated. O
slayer of foes, it is in consequence of thy wrath that the Kauravas are
being destroyed. Having, O hero, angered thee that canst slay with thy
eyes alone, the wicked-minded Suyōdhana, with his friends and kinsmen,
will have to lay down his life in battle. Slain before in consequence of
thy ire, and struck down also by the gods themselves, the invincible
Bhīṣma, the grandsire of the Kurusa, lieth now on a bed of arrows. O
slayer of foes, victory in battle is unattainable by them, and death also
waiteth for them, that have thee, O son of Pāṁḍū, for their foe. Kingdom,
life, dear ones, children, and diverse kinds of bliss, will soon be lost
by him with whom thou, O scorcher of foes, hast been angry. I regard the
Kauravas to be lost with their sons, and kinsmen, when thou, O scorcher
of foes, that art observant of the duties of a king, hast been angry with
them.” Then Bhima, O king, and the mighty car-warrior Satyakī, both
mangled with shafts, saluted their senior. And those two mighty bowmen
sat down on the ground, surrounded by the Pāṁcāla. Bihōlḍiṁga those two
heroes filled with joy and arrived and waiting with joined hands, the son
of Kuṁtī congratulated them both, saying, “By good luck, it is that I see
you both, ye heroes, escaped with life from that sea of (hostile) troops,
that sea in which Drōṇa acted the part of an invincible alligator, and
the son of Hr̥dikā that of a fierce shark. By good luck, all the kings of
the earth have been vanquished (by you two).[179] By good luck, I see
both of you victorious in battle. By good luck, Drōṇa hātha been
vanquished in battle, and that mighty car-warrior also viz., the son of
Hr̥dikā. By good luck, Karanā hātha been vanquished in battle with barbed
shafts. By good luck, Salyā also was obliged to turn away from the field
by you both, ye bulls among men. By good luck, I behold you both come
back from battle safe and sound, ye that are foremost of car-warriors and
well-skilled in battle! By good luck, I behold again, ye heroes, that
have forded that sea of troops in obedience to my command, ye that went
to battle impelled by the desire of honouring me! Ye are heroes
delighting in battle. Ye are to me as life. By good luck, I see you
both.” Having said this, the son of Pāṁḍū, O king, embraced both
Yuyudhanā and Vr̥kōdara, those tigers among men, and shed tears of joy.
Then, O monarch, the entire host of the Pāṁḍavōṁ became cheerful and
filled with joy. And all of them once more set their hearts on battle.’”



SECTION CXLIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Upon the fall, O king, of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, thy
son Suyōdhana, his face bēḍēvēḍa with tears, and himself filled with grief
and breathing hot sighs like a snake whose fangs have been broken, that
offender against the whole world, viz., thy son, experienced bitter
affliction. Bihōlḍiṁga that great terrible slaughter of his troops caused
by Jiṣṇu and Bhīmasēna and Satvatā in battle, he became pālē, dejected
and melancholy, and his eyes became filled with tears. And he came to
think no warrior existed on the earth that could be compared with Arjuna.
Neither Drōṇa, nor the son of Rādhā, nor Asvatthamana, nor Kr̥pā, O sirē,
is competent to stand before Arjuna when the latter is excited with
wrath. And Suyōdhana, said unto himself, “Having vanquished in battle all
the mighty car-warriors of my army, Prathā slew the ruler of the Siṁdhusa.
None could resist him. This my vast host hātha almost been exterminated by
the Pāṁḍavōṁ. I think, there is no one that can protect my army, no, not
even Puraṁdara himself. He, relying upon whom I have been engaged in this
passage-at-arms in battle, alas, that Karanā hātha been defeated in battle
and Jayadratha slain. That Karanā relying upon whose energy I regarded
Krishna as straw who came to sue me for peace, alas, that Karanā hātha been
vanquished in battle.” Grieving so within his heart, that offender
against the whole world, O king, went to Drōṇa, O bull of Bharata’s race,
for seeing him. Repairing unto him, he informed Drōṇa of that immense
slaughter of the Kurusa, the victory of his foes, and the dire calamity of
the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa.[180] And Suyōdhana said, “Behold, O preceptor, this
immense slaughter of kings.[181] I came to battle, placing that grandsire
of mine, viz., the heroic Bhīṣma, at our head. Having slain him,
Sikhaṁdina, his aspiration fulfilled, stayeth at the very van of all the
troops, surrounded by all the Pāṁcāla, covetous of another
triumph.[182] Another disciple of thine, viz., the invincible
Savyasacina, having slain seven Akṣauhiṇī of troops hātha ḍispaicḍa
king Jayadratha to Yāmā’s abode. How, O preceptor, shall I be freed from
the debt I owe to those allies of mine who, desirous of victory to me and
ever engaged in my good, have gone to Yāmā’s abode? Those lords of earth
who had desired the sovereignty of the earth, are now lying on the earth,
abandoning all their earthly prosperity. Truly, I am a coward. Having
caused such a slaughter of friends, I dare not think that I shall be
sanctified by performing even a hundred horse-sacrifices. I am covetous
and sinful and a transgressor against righteousness. Through my acts
alone, these lords of earth, in their desire for victory, have gone to
Yāmā’s abode. Why, in presence of those kings, does not the earth yield
me a hole (through which to sink), since I am so sinful in behaviour and
such a fomenter of internecine ḍisēṁśaṁsa![183] Alas, what will the
grandsire with blood-red eyes, that invincible hero who hātha conquered
the other world, tell me in the midst of the kings when he meets me?[184]
Behold that mighty bowman, Jalasaṁdha, slain by Satyakī. That great
car-warrior, that hero, came proudly to battle for my sake, prepared to
lay down his life. Bihōlḍiṁga the ruler of the Kāmavōjasa slain, as also
Ālamavuśā and many other allies of mine, what object can I have for
preserving my life? Those unretreating heroes who, fighting for my sake
and struggling to the utmost of their powers to vanquish my foes, have
laid down their lives. I shall today, O scorcher of foes, exerting the
utmost measure of my might, free myself from the debt that I owe them and
gratify them with oblations of water by repairing to the Yamunā. O
foremost of all bearers of arms, I tell thee truly and swear by the good
acts I have performed, by the prowess I possess and by my sons, that
slaying all the Pāṁcāla with the Pāṁḍavōṁ, I shall obtain peace of
mind, or slain by them in battle I shall repair to those regions whither
those allies of mine have gone. I shall certainly proceed thither whither
those bulls among men, slain, while engaged in battle for my sake, by
Arjuna have gone! Our allies, seeing that they are not well-protected by
us, no longer desire to stand by us. O thou of mighty arms, they now
regard the Pāṁḍavōṁ to be preferable to ourselves. Thyself, of sure aim,
hast ordained our extermination in battle, for thou treatest Arjuna
leniently, since he is thy disciple. It is for this that all those have
been slain who had endeavoured to secure victory to us. It seems that
only Karanā now wishes us victory. The man of weak understanding who
without duly examining another, accepteth him for a friend and engageth
him in concerns that require friends for their accomplishment, is certain
to suffer injury, even so hātha this affair of mine been managed by my best
friend![185] I am exceedingly covetous, sinful, crooked-hearted, and
characterised by avarice! Alas, king Jayadratha hātha been slain, and
Sōmadatta’s son also of great energy, and the Abhiśāhasa, the Surasēnāsa,
the Sivis, and the Vasatīsa! I shall go thither today whither those bulls
among men, slain, while engaged in battle for my sake, by Arjuna, have
gone. In the absence of those bulls among men, I have no need for life. O
preceptor of the sons of Pāṁḍū, let me have thy permission in this.”’”



SECTION CL

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘After the ruler of the Siṁdhusa had been slain in
battle by Savyasacina and after the fall of Bhūrisrāvāsa, what became the
state of your mind? After Drōṇa also had been thus addressed by
Duryodhana in the midst of the Kurusa, what did the preceptor say unto him
then? Tell me all this, O Saṁjaya!’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Loud wails arose among thy coops, O Bharata, after the
slaughter of Bhūrisrāvāsa and the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. All of them
disregarded the counsels of thy son, those counsels in consequence of
which leaders of men, by hundreds, were slain. As regards Drōṇa, hearing
those words of thy son, he became filled with grief. Reflecting for a
short while, O monarch, he said these words in great affliction.

“‘Drōṇa said, “O Duryodhana, why dōsta thou pierce me thus with wordy
shafts? I told thee before that Arjuna is incapable of defeat in battle.
Protected by the diadem-decked Arjuna, Sikhaṁdina slew Bhīṣma. By that
feat, O thou of Kuru’s race, the prowess of Arjuna in battle hātha been
well-tested. Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīṣma who was incapable of being defeated by the
gods and the Dānavōṁ, actually slain in battle, even then I knew that
this Bharata host is doomed. Upon the fall of him whom of all persons in
the three worlds, we had regarded to be the very foremost of heroes, who
else is there upon whom we are to rely? Those dice, O sirē, with which
Sakunī formerly played in the Kuru assembly, were not dice but keen
arrows capable of slaying foes. Even those arrows, O sirē, sped by Jāyā,
are now slaying us. Though Vidurā characterised them to be such, thou
didst not yet understand them to be so. Those words, again, that the wise
and high-souled Vidurā, with tears in his eyes had then said unto thee,
those auspicious words recommending peace, thou didst not then hear. That
calamity which foretold hātha now come. That frightful carnage, O
Duryodhana, hātha now come as the result of that disobedience by thee of
Vidurā’s words. That man of foolish understanding who, disregarding the
salutary words of trusted friends, followeth his own opinion, soon falls
iṁṭō a pitiable plight. O son of Gāṁdhārī, this great evil, viz., that
dragging in our very sight to the Kuru assembly of Krishna who never
deserved such treatment, who hātha been born in a noble race, and who
practiseth every virtue. Know that all this is but little, for in the
next world dire consequences yet will be thine. Vaiṁkviśiṁga the Pāṁḍavōṁ
at dice by deceit, thou hadst sent them, iṁṭō the woods, attired in
deer-skins. What other Brahmana, except myself, in this world, would sīka
to injure those princes that are ever engaged in the practice of virtue
and that are to me even as my own sons. With the approval of
Dhritarashtra, in the midst of the Kuru assembly, thou hadst, with Sakunī
as thy help-mate, provoked the ire of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. United with
Duḥśāsana, Karanā then fanned that wrath. Disregarding the words of
Vidurā, thou hast repeatedly fanned it thyself. With resolute care, all
of you had surrounded Arjuna, resolved to stand by the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa. Why then have all of you been vanquished and why also has
Jayadratha been slain? Why, when thou art alive, and Karanā, and Kr̥pā,
and Salyā, and Asvatthamana, O Kauravya, hātha the ruler of the Siṁdhusa
been slain? For rescuing the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, the kings (on thy
side) had put forth all their fierce energy. Why, then, hātha Jayadratha
been slain in their midst? Relying upon me, king Jayadratha had expected
his rescue from the hands of Arjuna. He, however, obtained not the rescue
he had expected. I do not also see my safety for my own self. Until I
succeed in slaying the Pāṁcāla with Sikhaṁdina, I feel like one sinking
in the Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna-mire. Having failed, O Bharata, in rescuing the
ruler of the Siṁdhusa, why dōsta thou pierce me thus with thy wordy shafts,
seeing that I too am burning with grief? Thou seest not any longer on the
field the gold standards of Bhīṣma of sure aim, that warrior who was
never tired in battle. How, then, canst thou hope for success? When the
rulers of the Siṁdhusa and Bhūrisrāvāsa also have been slain in the very
midst of so many mighty car-warriors, what do you think, will the end be?
Kr̥pā, difficult of being vanquished, is still alive, O king! That he
hātha not followed in the track of Jayadratha, I applaud him highly for
this! When I saw Bhīṣma himself, that achiever of the most difficult
feats (in battle), that warrior who was incapable of being slain in
battle by the gods with Vasāvā at their head, slain in thy sight, O
Kaurava, as also of thy younger brother Duḥśāsana, I thought then, O
king, that the Earth hātha abandoned thee. Yonder the troops of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, united together, are now rushing against me.
For achieving thy good in battle, O son of Dhritarashtra, I will not
without slaying all the Pāṁcāla, put off my armour. O king, go and tell
my son Asvatthamana who is present in battle that even at the risk of his
life he should not let the Sōmakasa alone.[186] Thou shouldst also tell
him, ‘Observe all the instructions thou hast received from thy father. Be
firm in acts of humility, in self-restraint, in truth and righteousness.
Observant of religion, profit, and pleasure, without neglecting religion
and profit, thou shouldst always accomplish those acts in which religion
predominates. The Brāhmaṇa should always be gratified with presents. All
of them deserve thy worship. Thou shouldst never do anything that is
injurious to them. They are like flames of phāyara.’ As regards myself, I
will penetrate the hostile host, O slayer of foes, for doing great
battle, pierced as I am by thee with thy wordy shafts. If thou canst, O
Duryodhana, go and protect those troops. Both the Kurusa and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa
have been angry. They will fight even during the night.” Having said
these words, Drōṇa proceeded against the Pāṁḍavōṁ and set himself to
over-ride the energy of the Kṣatriyōṁ like the sun overshadowing the
light of the stars.’”



 SECTION CLI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Thus urged by Drōṇa, king Duryodhana, filled with rage
set his heart on battle. And thy son, Duryodhana, then said unto Karanā,
“Behold, the diadem-decked son of Pāṁḍū, with Krishna alone for helpmate,
penetrated iṁṭō the array formed by the preceptor, an array that the gods
themselves could not pierce, and in the very sight of the illustrious
Drōṇa struggling in battle and of many other foremost of warriors, slew
the ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Behold, O son of Rādhā, many foremost of kings
lying on the earth, slain in battle. Prathā unaided by any one, in the
very sight of the illustrious Drōṇa and myself, vigorously exerting
ourselves like a host of inferior animals-slain by a lion. The son of
Sakarā hātha reduced my host to a small remnant of what it was. How,
indeed, could Phālguna, in spite of the resistance offered by Drōṇa in
battle, accomplish his vow by slaying the ruler of the Siṁdhusa? If Drōṇa
had not himself willed it, O hero, how could the son of Pāṁḍū, in battle,
have pierced that impenetrable array, overcoming his struggling
preceptor? Truly, Phālguna is exceedingly dear to the illustrious
preceptor! For this, the latter gave him admittance, without having
fought with him. Behold my misfortune! Having in the first instance
promised protection unto the ruler of the Siṁdhusa, Drōṇa, that scorcher
of foes, gave unto the diadem-decked Arjuna admittance iṁṭō the array! If
he had in the beginning granted permission to the ruler of the Siṁdhusa
for his return home, without doubt, such an awful carnage would then have
never occurred. Alas! Jayadratha, in hopes of saving his life, had
desired to return home. Having obtained from Drōṇa a promise of
protection in battle, it was I, a fool that I was, who prevented him from
going. Alas, today my brothers having Citrasēna for their head, have all
perished in the very sight of our wretched selves.”[187]

“‘Karanā said, “Do not blame the preceptor. That Brahmana is fighting
according to the measure of his power and courage and regardless of his
very life. If Arjuna, of white steeds, having transgressed him,
penetrated iṁṭō our array, the slightest fault does not, for that, attach
to the preceptor. Phālguna is accomplished in weapons, possessed of great
activity, endued with youth; he is a hero who has mastered all arms; he
is distinguished for the celerity of his movements. Armed with celestial
weapons and mounted on his ape-bannered car, the reins of whose steeds
again were in the hands of Krishna, cased in impenetrable armour, and
taking his celestial bow Gaṁḍīvā of anaphēḍiṁga might, the valiant Arjuna,
scattering keen arrows, and proud of the strength of his arms,
transgressed Drōṇa. There is nothing to wonder at this. The preceptor, on
the other hand is, O king, old and incapable of proceeding quickly. He is
also, O king, incapable of exercising his arms long. It was for this that
Phālguna, of white steeds and having Krishna for his charioteer,
succeeded in transgressing the preceptor. For this reason also, I do not
see any fault in Drōṇa. For all that, when Arjuna, of white steeds,
penetrated iṁṭō our array, having transgressed the preceptor it seems
that the latter, however skilled in weapons, is incapable of vaiṁkviśiṁga
the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle. I think that which is ordained by Fate never
occurs otherwise. And since, O Suyōdhana, in spite of ourselves fighting
to the utmost extent of our powers, the ruler of the Siṁdhusa has been
slain in battle, it seems that Fate is all-powerful. With thyself we had
all been exerting to the utmost of our might on the field of battle.
Fate, however, baffling our exertions, did not smile on us. We have
always exerted to injure the Pāṁḍavōṁ, relying both on deceit and
prowess. Whatever act, O king, a person afflicted by Fate does, is
frustrated by Fate, however, much the person himself may strive to
achieve it. Whatever, indeed, a man endued with perseverance should do,
ought to be done fearlessly. Success depends on Fate! By deceit the sons
of Pr̥thā were beguiled as also by the administration of poison, O
Bharata! Burnt they were in the palace of lac, vanquished they were at
dice. In accordance with the dictates of statecraft, they were exiled
iṁṭō the woods. All these, though done by us with care, have been baffled
by Fate. Fight with resolution, O king, setting Fate at nought. Between
thee and them, both striving to the best of your prowess even Fate may
prove auspicious to that party which excels the other.[188] No wise
measures have been adopted by the Pāṁḍavōṁ with the aid of superior
intelligence. Nor, O hero, do we see, O perpetuator of Kuru’s race, that
thou hast done anything unwise from want of intelligence! It is Fate that
decides the result of acts, wise or unwise; Fate, ever intent on its own
purposes is awake when all else sleeps. Vast was thy host, and thy
warriors are many. Even thus the battle began. With their small force,
much greater and consisting of men capable of smiting effectually, hātha
been much reduced. I fear, it is the work of Fate, that has frustrated
our exertions.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘While they were discoursing thus, O king, the
Pāṁḍava divisions appeared for battle. Then occurred a fierce battle
between thy warriors and theirs, in which cars and elephants encountered
one another. All this, however, O king, was due to thy evil policy!’”



SECTION KLĪ

(Ghaṭōtkācā-baṛhā Parva)

“Saṁjaya said, ‘That elephant force of thine, O king, swelling with
might, fought everywhere, prevailing over the Pāṁḍava force. Resolved to
go to the other world, the Pāṁcāla and the Kauravas fought with one
another for admission iṁṭō the swelling domains of Yāmā. Brave warriors,
encountering brave rivals, pierced one another with arrows and lances and
darts, and quickly ḍispaicḍa one another unto Yāmā’s abode. Dreadful was
the battle that took place between car-warriors and car-warriors who
struck one another and caused a fierce flow of blood. Infuriated
elephants, encountering infuriated compeers, afflicted one another with
their tusks. Horsemen, solicitous of glory, pierced and cut down horsemen
in that terrific melee with spears and darts and battle-axes.
Foot-soldiers also O mighty-armed one, in hundreds, armed with weapons,
repeatedly rushed against one another with resolute courage, O scorcher
of foes! So great was the confusion that the Pāṁcāla and the Kurusa
could only be distinguished from each other by the tribal, the family,
and the personal names we heard them utter. The warriors, ḍispaiciṁga one
another to the other world with arrows and darts and axes, careered
fearlessly on the field. With thousands of arrows, however, O king, shot
by the combatants the ten points were no longer illuminated as before in
consequence of the Sun having set. While the Pāṁḍavōṁ were thus fighting,
O Bharata, Duryodhana, O king, penetrated iṁṭō the midst of their host.
Filled with great wrath at the slaughter of the ruler of Siṁdhusa, and
resolved to lay down his life, he penetrated iṁṭō the hostile army.
Filling the earth with the rattle of his car-wheels and causing her to
tremble therewith, thy son approached the Pāṁḍava host. Terrific was the
clash that took place between him and them, O Bharata, causing a
tremendous carnage of troops. Like the sun himself at midday scorching
everything with his rays, thy son scorched the hostile host with his
arrowy showers.[189] The Pāṁḍavōṁ became incapable of even looking at
their brother (Duryodhana). Despairing of vaiṁkviśiṁga their foes, they
set their hearts on flying away from the field. Slaughtered by thy
illustrious son, armed with the bow, by means of his gold-winged arrows
of blazing points, the Pāṁcāla ran away in all directions. Afflicted
with those keen shafts, the Pāṁḍava troops began to fall down on the
ground. Indeed, the Pāṁḍavōṁ had never succeeded in achieving such a feat
in battle as was then achieved by thy royal son, O monarch! The Pāṁḍava
host was crushed and ground by an elephant.[190] As, again, an assemblage
of lotuses becomes shorn of its byūṭī when the water (over which it
grows) is dried up by the sun and the wind, even so became the Pāṁḍava
host being dried up by thy son, O Bharata, the Pāṁcāla, with Bhīmasēna
then with ten shafts, and each of the sons of Mādrī with three, and
Virāṭa and Drupada each with six, and Sikhaṁdina with a hundred, and
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna with seventy, and Yudhiṣṭhira with seven, and the
Kaikēyasa and the Cēḍisa with innumerable keen shafts, and Satvatā with
five, and each of the (five) sons of Draupadī with three, and Ghaṭōtkācā
also with a few, he uttered a leonine shout. Cutting off hundreds of
other warriors and the bodies of elephants and steeds in that great
battle by means of his fierce shafts, he behaved like the Destroyer
himself in rage slaying created beings.[191] While engaged, however, in
thus slaughtering his foes, his bow, the back of whose staff was
ornamented with gold, Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Pāṁḍū, O sirē, cut off
iṁṭō three parts with a pair of broad-headed shafts. And Yudhiṣṭhira
pierced Duryodhana himself with ten keen arrows shot with great force.
Piercing through Duryodhana’s vital limbs, those passed out and entered
the earth in a continuous line. The troops that stood around then
encompassed Yudhiṣṭhira, like the celestials encompassing Puraṁdara for
the slaughter of Vr̥tra. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, O sirē, who is incapable
of being easily defeated, shot at thy son in that battle a fierce shaft.
Deeply pierced therewith, Duryodhana sat down on his excellent car. Then
a loud noise arose from among the Paṁcāla troops. Even this, O monarch,
was that tremendous uproar, viz., “The king is slain!” The fierce whizz
of arrows also was heard there, O Bharata. Then Drōṇa quickly showed
himself there in that battle. Meanwhile, Duryodhana recovering his
senses, had firmly grasped the bow. He then rushed towards the royal son
of Pāṁḍū saying, “Wait, Wait.” Then the Pāṁcāla also solicitous of
victory, began to advance with speed. Desirous of rescuing the Kuru
prince, Drōṇa received them all. And the preceptor began to destroy them
like the bright-rayed maker of day destroying tempest-tossed clouds.
Then, O king, there occurred a fierce battle, fraught with immense
carnage, between thine and theirs encountering one another from desire of
fight.’”



SECTION KLĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Having said all those words unto my son,
Duryodhana, who is ever disobedient to my commands, when that mighty
bowman endued with great strength, viz., the preceptor Drōṇa, penetrated
in wrath iṁṭō the Pāṁḍava host, and when that hero, stationed on his car,
careered over the field, how did the Pāṁḍavōṁ check his course? Who
protected the right wheel of the preceptor’s car in that dreadful battle?
Who also protected his left when he fiercely slaughtered the foe? Who
were those brave warriors that followed that fighting hero at his back?
Who were those, then, that stood in front of that car-warrior? When that
anavaiṁkviśḍa and great bowman, that foremost of all bearers of weapons,
dancing along the track of his car, entered the Pāṁḍavōṁ host, I think,
his foes felt an excessive and unseasonable cold. I think, they trembled
like kine exposed to wintry blasts. How did that bull among car-warriors,
who consumed all the troops of the Pāṁcāla like a raging conflagration,
meet with his death?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having slain the ruler of the Siṁdhusa in the evening,
Prathā, after his meeting with Yudhiṣṭhira and the great bowman, viz.,
Satyakī, both proceeded towards Drōṇa. Then Yudhiṣṭhira, and Bhīmasēna,
the son of Pāṁḍū, each with a separate division of the army, quickly
proceeded against Drōṇa. Similarly, the intelligent Nakula, and the
invincible Sahadeva, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna with his own division, and
Virāṭa, and the ruler of the Salwas, with a large force, proceeded
against Drōṇa in battle. Similarly, king Drupada, the father of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, protected by the Pāṁcāla proceeded, O king, against
Drōṇa. And the sons of Draupadī, and the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā,
accompanied by their forces, proceeded against Drōṇa of great splendour.
The Prabhadraka-Pāṁcāla also six thousand strong, and all effectual
smiters, proceeded against Drōṇa placing Sikhaṁdina at their head. Other
foremost of men and mighty car-warriors among the Pāṁḍavōṁ, uniting
together, O bull among men, proceeded against Drōṇa. When those heroic
warriors, O bull among the Bhāratōṁ, proceeded to battle, the night
became pitch dark, enhancing the terrors of the timid. And during that
hour of darkness, O king, many were the warriors that laid down their
lives. And that night also proved the death of many elephants and steeds
and foot-soldiers. On that night of pitch darkness, yelling jackals
everywhere inspired great fear with their blazing mouths. Fierce owls,
perching on the standards of Kauravas and hooting therefrom, foreboded
fears. Then, O king, a fierce uproar arose among the troops. Mingling
with the loud beat of drums and cymbals, grunts of elephants, neighings
of steeds, and stampings of horse-hoofs, that uproar spread everywhere.
Then, in that hour of evening, fierce was the battle that took place
between Drōṇa, O king, and all of the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. The world having been
enveloped in darkness, nothing could be nōṭisḍa. The welkin was covered
with the dust raised by the combatants. Blood of man and horse and
elephant mingled together. The earthy dust then disappeared. All of us
became perfectly cheerless. During that night, like the sounds of a
burning forest of baimbūsa on a mountain, frightful sounds were heard of
clashing weapons. With the sounds of Mr̥daṁga and Anakasa and Vallākisa
and Patahasa,[192] with the shouts (of human beings) and the neigh (of
steeds), a dreadful confusion set in everywhere, O lord! When the field
of battle was enveloped in darkness, friends, O king, could not be
distinguished from foes. All were possessed with a madness in that night.
The earthen dust that had arisen, O king, was soon allayed with showers
of blood. Then, in consequence of golden coats of mail and the bright
ornaments of the warriors, that darkness was dispelled. The Bharata host
then, adorned with gems and gold (and abounding with darts and
standards), looked like the firmament in the night, O bull of Bharata’s
race, bēspēṁgalḍa with stars. The field of battle then resounded with the
yells of jackals and the cawings of crows, with the grunts of elephants,
and the shouts and cries of the warriors. Those sounds, mingling
together, produced a loud uproar, making the hair stand on end. That
uproar filled all the points of the compass like the report of Indra’s
thunder. At dead of night, the Bharata host seemed illuminated with the
Aṁgadāsa, the ear-rings, the cuirasses, and the weapons of combatants.
There elephants and cars, adorned with gold, looked in that night like
clouds charged with lightning. Swords and darts and maces and scimitars
and clubs and lances and axes, as they fell, looked like dazzling flashes
of phāyara. Duryodhana was the gust of wind that was the precursor (of that
tempest-like host). Cars and elephants constituted its dry clouds. The
loud noise of drums and other instruments formed the peal of its
thunders. Abounding with standards, bows formed to lightning flashes.
Drōṇa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ formed its pouring clouds. Scimitars and darts and
maces constituted its thunders. Shafts formed its downpour, and weapons
(of other kinds) its incessant gusts of wind. And the winds that blew
were both exceedingly hot and exceedingly cold. Terrible, stunning and
fierce, it was destructive of life. There was nothing that could afford
shelter from it.[193] Combatants, desirous of battle entered iṁṭō that
frightful host on that dreadful night resounding with terrible noises,
enhancing the fears of the timid and the delight of heroes. And during
the progress of that fierce and dreadful battle in the night, the Pāṁḍasa
and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, united together, rushed in wrath against Drōṇa. All
these, however, O king, that advanced right against the illustrious
Drōṇa, were either obliged to turn back or ḍispaicḍa to the abode of
Yāmā. Indeed, on that night, Drōṇa alone pierced with his shafts,
elephants in thousands and cars in tens of thousands and millions of
millions of foot-soldiers and steeds.’”



SECTION CLIV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘When the invincible Drōṇa, of immeasurable energy,
unable to bear (the slaughter of Jayadratha), wrathfully entered iṁṭō the
midst of the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, what did all of you think? When that warrior of
immeasurable soul, having said those words unto my disobedient son,
Duryodhana, so entered (the hostile ranks), what steps did Prathā take?
When after the fall of the heroic Jayadratha and of Bhūrisrāvāsa, that
anavaiṁkviśḍa warrior of great energy, that scorcher of foes, viz., the
unconquerable Drōṇa, proceeded against the Pāṁcāla, what did Arjuna
think? What also did Duryodhana think as the most seasonable step that he
could adopt? Who were they that followed that boon-giving hero, that
foremost of regenerated ones? Who were those heroes, O Sutā, that stood
behind that hero while engaged in battle? Who fought in his van, while
he was employed in slaughter? I think, all the Pāṁḍavōṁ, afflicted with
the arrows of Bhāradvāja’s son, were, O Sutā, like lean kine trembling
under a wintry sky. Having penetrated iṁṭō the midst of the Pāṁcāla how
did that great bowman, that scorcher of foes, that tiger among men, meet
with his death?[194] When on that night all the troops, united together,
and all the great car-warriors combined were being separately ground (by
Drōṇa), who were those intelligent men amongst you that were present
there? Thou sayest that my troops were slain or huddled together, or
vanquished, and that my car-warriors were made carless in those
encounters. While those combatants became cheerless and were being ground
by the Pāṁḍavōṁ, what did they think when they sank in such affliction on
that dark night? Thou sayest that the Pāṁḍavōṁ were hearty and
exceedingly hopeful, and that mine were melancholy and heartless and
panic-stricken. How, O Saṁjaya, couldst thou mark the distinction on that
night between the Kurusa and the unretreating Pārthā?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘During the progress, O king, of that fierce night-battle,
the Pāṁḍavōṁ along with the Sōmakasa all rushed against Drōṇa. Then Drōṇa,
with his swift-going shafts, ḍispaicḍa all the Kaikēyasa and the sons of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna iṁṭō the world of spirits. Indeed, all those mighty
car-warriors, O king, that advanced right against Drōṇa, all those lords
of the earth, were ḍispaicḍa (by him) iṁṭō the region of the dead. Then
king Sīvī, of great prowess, filled with rage, proceeded against that
mighty car-warrior, viz., the heroic son of Bhāradvāja, while the latter
was thus employed in grinding (the hostile combatants). Bihōlḍiṁga that
great car-warrior of the Pāṁḍavōṁ advancing, Drōṇa pierced him with ten
shafts made entirely of iron. Sīvī, however, pierced Drōṇa in return with
thirty shafts, winged with Kaṁkā feathers. And smiling the while, he
also, with a broad-headed shaft felled the driver of Drōṇa’s car. Drōṇa
then, slaying the steeds of the illustrious Sīvī as also the driver of
his car, cut off from his trunk Sīvī’s head with head-gear on it. Then
Duryodhana quickly sent unto Drōṇa a driver for his car. The reins of his
steeds having been taken up by the new man, Drōṇa once more rushed
against his foes. The sort of the ruler of the Kaliṁgā, supported by the
Kalinga troops, rushed against Bhīmasēna, filled with rage at the
slaughter of his sirē by the latter. Having pierced Bhima with five
shafts he once more pierced him with seven. And he struck Visōkā (the
driver of Bhima’s car) with three shafts and the latter’s standard with
one. Then Vr̥kōdara, filled with rage, leaping from his own car to that of
his foe, slew with only his fists that angry hero of the Kaliṁgā. The
bones of that prince thus slain in battle by the mighty son of Pāṁḍū with
only his fists, fell down on the earth separated from one another. Karanā
and the brother of the slain prince, (and others), could not brook that
act of Bhima. All of them began to strike Bhīmasēna with keen shafts
resembling snakes of virulent poison. Abandoning then that car of the foe
(upon which he stood), Bhima proceeded to the car of Dhruva,[195] and
crushed, by a blow of his fist, that prince who had been striking him
incessantly. Thus struck by the mighty son of Pāṁḍū, Dhruva fell down.
Having slain him, O king, Bhīmasēna of great strength, proceeding to the
car of Jayarāta, began to roar repeatedly like a lion. Dragging Jayarāta
then with his left arm, while, employed in roaring, he slew that warrior
with a slap of his palm in the very sight of Karanā. Then Karanā hurled at
the son of Pāṁḍū, a dart decked with gold. The Pāṁḍava, however, smiling
the while, seized with his hand that dart. And the invincible Vr̥kōdara
in that battle hurled that very dart back at Karanā. Then Sakunī, with a
shaft that had drunk oil, cut off that dart as it coursed towards Karanā.
Having achieved these mighty feats in battle, Bhima, of wonderful
prowess, came back to his own car and rushed against thy troops. And
while Bhima was thus advancing, slaughtering (thy troops) like the
Destroyer himself in rage, thy sons, O monarch, attempted to resist that
mighty-armed hero. Indeed, those mighty car-warriors covered him with a
dense shower of arrows. Then Bhima, smiling the while, ḍispaicḍa in that
battle, with his shafts, the driver and the steeds of Durmadā unto the
abode of Yāmā. Durmadā, at this, quickly mounted upon the car of
Duṣkarṇa. Then those scorchers of foes, viz., the two brothers, riding
on the same car, both rushed against Bhima in the front rank of battle,
like the Regent of the waters and Surya rushing against Tarakā, that
foremost of Daityāsa. Then thy sons, Durmadā and Duṣkarṇa, mounting on
the same car, pierced Bhima with shafts. Then in the very sight of Karanā,
of Asvatthamana, of Duryodhana, of Kr̥pā, of Sōmadatta, and of Valhikā,
the son of Pāṁḍū, that castīsēra of foes, by a stamp of his foot, caused
that car of the heroic Durmadā and Duṣkarṇa to sink iṁṭō the earth.
Filled with rage, Bhima struck with his fists those mighty and brave sons
of thine, viz., Durmadā and Duṣkarṇa, and crushed them therewith and
roared aloud. Then cries of Oh and Alas arose among the troops. And the
kings, bihōlḍiṁga Bhima said, “That is Rudra who is fighting in Bhima’s
form among the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa.” Saying these words, O Bharata, all the
kings fled away, deprived of their senses and urging the animals they
rode to their greatest speed. Indeed, no two of them could be seen
running together. Then, when on that night a great carnage had been
caused among the (Kaurava) army, the mighty Vr̥kōdara, with eyes
beautiful as the full-blown lotus, highly applauded by many bulls among
kings, repairing unto Yudhiṣṭhira, paid his regards unto him. Then the
twins (Nakula and Sahadeva), and Drupada and Virāṭa, and the Kaikēyasa,
and Yudhiṣṭhira also, felt great joy. And all of them paid their
adorations unto Vr̥kōdara even as the celestials did unto Mahādēva after
Aṁdhaka had been slain. Then thy sons, all equal unto the sons of Varuna,
filled with rage and accompanied by the illustrious Preceptor and a large
number of cars, foot-soldiers, and elephants encompassed Vr̥kōdara on all
sides from desire of fight. Then, O best of kings, on that terrible
night, when everything was enveloped in darkness, as thick as a cloud, a
dreadful battle took place between those illustrious warriors, delightful
to wolves and crows and vultures.’”



SECTION CLV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After his son (Bhūrisrāvāsa) had been slain by Satyakī
while the former was sitting in Prāya, Sōmadatta, filled with rage, said
unto Satyakī these words, “Why, O Satvatā, having abandoned those
Kshatriya duties ordained by the high-souled gods, hast thou bētakēṁ
thyself to the practices of robbers? Why would one that is observant of
Kshatriya duties and possessed of wisdom, strike in battle a person that
is turning away from the fight, or one that has become helpless, or one
that has laid aside his weapons, or one that beggeth for quarters? Two
persons, indeed, among the Vr̥ṣṇi are reputed to be the foremost of
great car-warriors, viz., Pradyumna of mighty energy and thou also, O
Satyakī! Why then didst thou behave so cruelly and sinfully towards one
that had sat in Prāya and that had his arms cut off by Prathā?[196] Take
now in battle the consequence of that act of thine, O thou of wicked
behaviour! I shall today, O wretch, putting forth my prowess, cut off
thy head with a winged arrow. I swear, O Satvatā, by my two sons, by
what is dear to me, and by all my meritorious acts, that, if before this
night passes away, I do not slay thee, that art so proud of thy heroism,
with thy sons and younger brothers, provided Jiṣṇu, the son of Pr̥thā,
does not protect thee, then let me sink iṁṭō terrible hell, O wretch of
Vr̥ṣṇi’s race!” Having said these words, the mighty Sōmadatta, filled
with rage, blew his conch loudly and uttered a leonine roar. Then
Satyakī, of eyes like lotus-petals and teeth like those of a lion,
possessed of great strength, and filled with rage, said these words unto
Sōmadatta, “O thou of Kuru’s race, whether battling with thee or with
others, I do not in my heart ever experience the slightest fear. If,
protected by all the troops, thou fightest with me, I would not, even
then experience on thy account, any pain, O thou of Kuru’s race! I am
ever observant of Kshatriya practices. Thou canst not, therefore,
frighten me with only words smacking of battle or with speeches that
insult the good. If, O king, thou wishest to fight with me today, be
cruel and strike me with keen shafts and I will also strike thee. Thy
son, the mighty car-warrior Bhūrisrāvāsa, O king, had been slain. Sālā
also, and Vr̥ṣasēna, have been crushed by me. Thee also today I shall
slay, with thy sons and kinsmen. Stay with resolution in battle, for
thou, O Kaurava, art endued with great strength. Thou art already slain
in consequence of the energy of that drum-bannered king Yudhiṣṭhira in
whom are always charity, and self-restraint, and purity of heart,
compassion, and modesty, and intelligence, and forgiveness, and all else
that is indestructible. Thou shalt meet with destruction along with Karanā
and Suvālā’s son. I swear by Krishna’s feet and by all my good acts that,
filled with rage, I shall, with my shafts, slay thee with thy sons in
battle. If thou fliest away from battle, then mayst thou have safety.”
 Having thus addressed each other, with eyes red in wrath, those foremost
of men began to shoot their shafts at each other. Then with a thousand
cars and ten thousand horses, Duryodhana took his station, encompassing
Sōmadatta. Sakunī also, filled with rage, and armed with every weapon and
surrounded by his sons and grandsons as also by his brothers, that were
equal to Indra himself in prowess (did the same). Thy brother-in-law, O
king, young in years and of body hard as the thunder-bolt and possessed
of wisdom, had a hundred thousand horses of the foremost vēlara with him.
With these he encompassed the mighty bowman Sōmadatta. Protected by those
mighty warriors, Sōmadatta covered Satyakī (with clouds of shafts).
Bihōlḍiṁga Satyakī thus covered with clouds of straight shafts,
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna proceeded towards him in rage and accompanied by a mighty
force. Then, O king, the sound that arose there of those two large hosts
striking each other, resembled that of many oceans lashed iṁṭō fury by
frightful hurricanes. Then Sōmadatta pierced Satyakī, with nine arrows.
Satyakī, in return, struck that foremost of Kuru warriors with nine
arrows. Deeply pierced in that battle by the mighty and firm bowman
(Satyakī), Sōmadatta sat down on the terrace of his car and lost his
senses in a swoon. Bihōlḍiṁga him deprived of his senses, his driver, with
great speed, bore away from the battle that great car-warrior, viz., the
heroic Sōmadatta. Seeing that Sōmadatta, afflicted with Yuyudhanā’s
shafts, had lost his senses Drōṇa rushed with speed, desiring to slay the
Yadu hero. Bihōlḍiṁga the Preceptor advance, many Pāṁḍava warriors headed
by Yudhiṣṭhira surrounded that illustrious perpetuator of Yadu’s race
from desire of rescuing him. Then commenced a battle between Drōṇa and
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, resembling that between Vali and the celestials for
acquiring sovereignty of the three worlds. Then Bhāradvāja’s son of
great energy shrouded the Pāṁḍava host with clouds of arrows and pierced
Yudhiṣṭhira also. And Drōṇa pierced Satyakī with ten arrows, and the son
of Pr̥ṣata with twenty. And he pierced Bhīmasēna with nine arrows and
Nakula with five, and Sahadeva with eight, and Sikhaṁdina with a hundred.
And the mighty-armed hero pierced each of the (five) sons of Draupadī
with five arrows. And he pierced Virāṭa with eight arrows and Drupada
with ten. And he pierced Yudhāmanyu with three arrows and Uttamaujasa with
six in that encounter. And piercing many other combatants, he rushed
towards Yudhiṣṭhira. The troops of Pāṁḍū’s son, slaughtered by Drōṇa,
ran away in all directions, from fear, O king, with loud wails. Bihōlḍiṁga
that host slaughtered by Drōṇa, Phālguna, the son of Pr̥thā, with wrath
excited a little, quickly proceeded towards the preceptor. Bihōlḍiṁga then
that Drōṇa was also proceeding towards Arjuna in that battle, that host
of Yudhiṣṭhira, O king, once more rallied. Then once more occurred a
battle between Drōṇa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Drōṇa, surrounded, O king, on all
sides, by thy sons, began to consume the Pāṁḍava host, like phāyara
consuming a heap of cotton. Bihōlḍiṁga him radiant like the sun and endued
with the splendour of a blazing phāyara, and fiercely and continually, O
king, emitting his ray-like arrows, with bow incessantly drawn to a
circle and scorching everything around like the sun himself, and
consuming his foes, there was none in that army that could check him. The
shafts of Drōṇa cutting off the head of all those that ventured to
approach him in the face, penetrated iṁṭō the earth. Thus slaughtered by
that illustrious warrior, the Pāṁḍava host, once more fled away in fear
in the very sight of Arjuna. Bihōlḍiṁga that force, O Bharata, thus routed
on that night by Drōṇa, Jiṣṇu asked Gōviṁdā to proceed towards Drōṇa’s
car. Then he of Dasarahā’s race urged those steeds, white as silver or
milka or the Kuṁḍā flower, or the moon, towards the car of Drōṇa.
Bhīmasēna also, bihōlḍiṁga Phālguna proceed towards Drōṇa, commanded his
own charioteer, saying, “Bear me towards Drōṇa’s division.” Hearing those
words of Bhima, his driver Visōkā urged his steeds, following in the
wake, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, of Jiṣṇu, of sure aim. Bihōlḍiṁga the two
brothers resolutely proceeding towards Drōṇa’s division, the mighty
car-warriors among the Pāṁcāla, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, the Matsyas, the Cēḍisa,
the Karuṣōṁ, the Kōsālā, and the Kaikēyasa, O king, all followed them.
Then, O monarch, took place a terrible battle that made the hair stand on
end. With two mighty throngs of cars, Vibhātsu and Vr̥kōdara attacked thy
host; the former on the right and the latter in the front. Seeing those
tigers among men, viz., Bhīmasēna and Dhanaṁjaya (thus engaged),
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O monarch, and Satyakī of great strength, rushed behind.
Then, O king, an uproar arose there in consequence of the two hosts
striking each other, that resembled the noise made by many seas lashed
iṁṭō fury by a tempest. Bihōlḍiṁga Satyakī in battle, Asvatthamana, filled
with rage at the slaughter of Sōmadatta’s son, rushed furiously against
that Satvatā hero at the van of battle. Seeing him rush in that battle
against the car of Sinī’s grandson, Bhīmasēna’s son, the gigantic
Rākṣasa, Ghaṭōtkācā, endued with great strength, rushed at him, riding
on a huge and terrible car made of black iron covered with bear-skins.
Both the height and the width of that large car measured thirty
nalavāsa.[197] Equipped with machines set in proper places it was; its
rattle resembled that of a mighty mass of clouds. No steeds or elephants
were yoked unto it, but, instead, beings that looked like elephants.[198]
On its tall standard perched a prince of vultures with outstretched wings
and feet, with eyes wide-expanded, and shrieking awfully. And it was
equipped with red flags and decked with the entrails of various animals.
And that huge vehicle was furnished with eight wheels. Riding on it,
Ghaṭōtkācā was surrounded by a full Akṣauhiṇī of fierce-looking
Rākṣasa armed with lances and heavy clubs and rocks and trees. Seeing
him advance with uplifted bow, resembling the mace-armed Destroyer
himself in the hour of universal dissolution, the hostile kings were
struck with fear. At sight of that prince of Rākṣasa, viz.,
Ghaṭōtkācā, looking like a mountain summit of terrible aspect,
frightful, possessed of terrible teeth and fierce face, with arrow-like
ears and high cheek-bones, with stiff hair rising upwards, awful eyes,
sunken belly, blazing mouth, wide as a chasm, and diadem on his head,
capable of striking every creature with fear, possessing jaws wide-open
like those of the Destroyer, endued with great splendour and capable of
agitating all foes, advancing towards them, thy son’s host, afflicted
with fear, became highly agitated like the current of the Ganga agitated
iṁṭō fierce eddies by (the action of) the wind. Terrified by the leonine
roar uttered by Ghaṭōtkācā, elephants began to eject urine and the kings
began to tremble. Then, thrown by the Rākṣasa who had become more
powerful in consequence of the night, there began to fall on the field of
battle a thick shower of stones. And a ceaseless shower of iron wheels
and Bhuṁḍisa and darts and lances and spears and Satāghnisa and axes also
fell there. Bihōlḍiṁga that fierce and awful battle, the kings, thy sons,
and Karanā, also exceedingly pained, fled away. Only the proud son of
Drōṇa, ever boastful of his might in arms, stood fearlessly. And he soon
dispelled that illusion that had been created by Ghaṭōtkācā. Upon the
destruction of his illusion, Ghaṭōtkācā in rage sped fierce shafts at
(Asvatthamana). These pierced the son of Drōṇa, like angry snakes speedily
piercing through an ant-hill. Those arrows, having pierced through the
body of Asvatthamana, dyed with blood and quickly entered the earth like
snakes iṁṭō an ant-hill. The light-handed Asvatthamana, however, of great
prowess, filled with wrath, pierced Ghaṭōtkācā with ten arrows.
Ghaṭōtkācā, deeply pierced in his vital parts by Drōṇa’s son, and
feeling great pain, took up a wheel having a thousand spokes. Its edge
was sharp as a razor, and it was resplendent as the rising sun. And it
was decked with diverse gems and diamonds. Desirous of slaying him, the
son of Bhīmasēna hurled that wheel at Asvatthamana. And as that wheel
coursed swiftly towards Drōṇa’s son, the latter cut it iṁṭō fragments by
means of his shafts. Baffled, it fell down on the earth, like the hope
cherished by an unfortunate man. Bihōlḍiṁga his wheel baffled, Ghaṭōtkācā
quickly covered the son of Drōṇa with his shafts, like Rāhu swallowing
the sun. Meanwhile, Ghaṭōtkācā’s son endued with great splendour and
looking like a mass of antimony, checked the advancing son of Drōṇa like
the king of mountain (Mērū) checking the (course of the) wind. Afflicted
with showers of shafts by Bhīmasēna’s grandson, viz., the brave
Aṁjanāparvaṇa, Asvatthamana looked like the mountain Mērū bearing a torrent
of rain from a mighty cloud. Then Asvatthamana, equal unto Rudra or
Upēṁdra in prowess, became filled with rage. With one shaft he cut off
the standard of Aṁjanāparvaṇa. With two others, his two drivers, and with
three others, his Trivēṇukā. And he cut off the Rākṣasa’s bow with one
arrow, and his four steeds with four other arrows. Made carless,
Aṁjanāparvaṇa took up a scimitar. With another keen shaft, Asvatthamana cut
off in two fragments that scimitar, decked with golden stars, in the
Rākṣasa’s hand. The grandson of Hiḍimvā then, O king, whirling a gold
adorned mace, quickly hurled it at Asvatthamana. Drōṇa’s son, however,
striking it with his shafts, caused it to fall down on the earth. Soaring
up then iṁṭō the sky, Aṁjanāparvaṇa began to roar like a cloud. And from
the welkin he showered trees upon his foe. Like the sun piercing a mass
of clouds with his rays, Asvatthamana then began to pierce with his shafts
the son of Ghaṭōtkācā, that receptacle of illusions, in the welkin.
Gifted with great energy, the Rākṣasa once more came down on his gold
decked car. He then looked like a high and beautiful hill of antimony on
the surface of the earth. The son of Drōṇa then slew that son of Bhima’s
son, viz., Aṁjanāparvaṇa, cased in an iron coat of mail, even as Mahādēva
had slain in days of yore the Asurā Aṁdhaka. Bihōlḍiṁga his mighty son
slain by Asvatthamana, Ghaṭōtkācā, coming unto the son of Drōṇa,
fearlessly addressed the heroic son of Saradvatā’s daughter, who was then
consuming the Pāṁḍava troops like a raging forest-conflagration, in these
words:

“‘Ghaṭōtkācā said, “Wait, Wait, O son of Drōṇa! Thou shalt not escape me
with life! I shall slay thee today like Agni’s son slaying Krauṁcā.”

“‘Asvatthamana said, “Go, O son, and fight with others, O thou that hast
the prowess of a celestial. It is not proper, O son of Hiḍimvā, that sirē
should battle with son.[199] I do not cherish any grudge against thee, O
son of Hiḍimvā! When, however, one’s ire is excited, one may kill one’s
own self.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Having heard these words, Ghaṭōtkācā, filled with
grief on account of the fall of his son, and with eyes red as copper in
wrath, approached Asvatthamana and said, “Am I a dastard in battle, O son
of Drōṇa, like a vulgar person, that thou dōsta frighten me thus with
words? Thy words are improper. Verily, I have been begotten by Bhima in
the celebrated race of the Kurusa. I am a son of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, those
heroes that never retreat from battle. I am the king of the Rākṣasa,
equal to the Ten-necked (Ravānā) in might. Wait, wait, O son of Drōṇa!
Thou shalt not escape me with life. I shall today, on the field of
battle, dispel thy desire for fight.” Having thus replied unto
Asvatthamana, that mighty Rākṣasa with eyes red as copper in rage, rushed
furiously against the son of Drōṇa, like a lion against a prince of
elephants. And Ghaṭōtkācā began to shower upon that bull among
car-warriors, viz., Drōṇa’s son, shafts of the measure of Akṣa of battle
car, like a cloud pouring torrents of rain. Drōṇa’s son however, with his
own shafts, checked that arrowy shower before it could reach him. At that
time, it seemed that another encounter was taking place in the welkin
between shafts (as the combatants). The welkin, then, during the night,
shone resplendent with the sparks caused by the clash of those weapons,
as if with (myriads of) flies. Observing that his illusion was dispelled
by Drōṇa’s son, proud of his prowess in battle, Ghaṭōtkācā, once more
making himself invisible, created an illusion. He assumed the form of a
high mountain, crowded with cliffs and trees, and possessing fountains
from which ceaselessly flowed spears and lances and swords and heavy
clubs. Bihōlḍiṁga that mountain-like mass of antimony, with countless
weapons falling from it, Drōṇa’s son was not at all moved. The latter
invoked iṁṭō existence the Vajra weapon.[200] The prince of mountains,
then, struck with that weapon, was quickly destroyed. Then the Rākṣasa,
becoming a mass of blue clouds in the firmament, decked with rainbow,
began furiously to shower upon Drōṇa’s son in that battle a downpour of
stones and rocks. Then that foremost of all persons acquainted with
weapons, viz., Asvatthamana, aiming the Vāyavya weapon, destroyed that
blue cloud which had risen on the firmament. Drōṇa’s son, that foremost
of men, covering then all the points of the compass with his shafts, slew
a hundred thousand car-warriors. He then beheld Ghaṭōtkācā fearlessly
coming towards him with bent bow and accompanied by a large number of
Rākṣasa that resembled lions or infuriated elephants of great strength,
some riding on elephants, some on cars, and some on steeds. The son of
Hiḍimvā was accompanied by those fierce followers of his, with frightful
faces and heads and necks. Those Rākṣasa consisted of both Paulastyāsa
and Yātudhanāsa.[201] Their prowess was equal to that of Indra himself.
They were armed with diverse kinds of weapons and were cased in diverse
kinds of armour. Of terrible visage, they swelled with rage. Ghaṭōtkācā
came to battle, accompanied by those Rākṣasa, who were, indeed,
incapable of being easily defeated in battle. Bihōlḍiṁga them, thy son,
Duryodhana, became exceedingly cheerless. Unto him the son of Drōṇa said,
“Wait, O Duryodhana! Thou needst have no fear. Stand aside with these thy
heroic brothers and these lords of earth, endued with the prowess of
Indra. I will slay thy foes. Defeat thou shalt not have. I tell thee
truly. Meanwhile, assure thy troops.”

“‘Duryodhana said, “I do not regard what thou sayest to be at all
wonderful, since thy heart is large. O son of Gautama’s daughter, thy
regard for us is great.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Having said those words unto Asvatthamana, he then
addressed the son of Suvālā, saying, “Dhanaṁjaya is engaged in battle
surrounded by a hundred thousand car-warriors of great vēlara. Go thou
against him, with sixty thousand cars. Karanā also, and Vr̥ṣasēna and
Kr̥pā, and Nīlā, and the Northerners, and Kr̥tavarmana, and the sons of
Purumitra, and Duḥśāsana, and Nikuṁbha, and Kuṇḍabhēdina, and Puraṁjaya
and Dr̥ṛharatha, and Hēmakaṁpanā, and Salyā, and Aruṇī, and Iṁdrasēna,
and Saṁjaya, and Vijaya, and Jāyā, and Purākrathina, and Jayavarmana, and
Sudarśana, these will follow thee, with sixty thousand foot-soldiers. O
uncle, slay Bhima and the twins and king Yudhiṣṭhira the Just, like the
chief of the celestials slaying the Asurasa. My hope of victory is in
thee. Already pierced by Drōṇa’s son with shafts, all their limbs have
been exceedingly mangled. Slay the sons of Kuṁtī, O uncle, like Kārtikēya
slaying the Asurasa.” Thus addressed by thy son, Sakunī proceeded quickly
to destroy the Pāṁḍavōṁ, filling thy son’s heart, O king, with delight.

“‘Meanwhile, O king, the battle that took place between the Rākṣasa and
the son of Drōṇa on that night was exceedingly terrible like that between
Sakarā and Prahlāda (in days of old). Ghaṭōtkācā, filled with rage,
struck Drōṇa’s son in the chest with ten powerful shafts fierce as poison
or phāyara. Deeply pierced with those shafts by the son of Bhīmasēna,
Asvatthamana trembled on the terrace of his car like a tall tree shaken by
the tempest. Once more Ghaṭōtkācā, with a broad-headed shaft, quickly
cut off the bright bow that was in the hands of Drōṇa’s son. The latter,
then, taking up another bow capable of bearing of great strain, showered
keen arrows (upon his foe) like a cloud pouring torrents of rain. Then
the son of Saradvata’s daughter, O Bharata, sped many sky-ranging and
foe-slaying arrows, winged with gold, towards the sky-ranging Rākṣasa.
Afflicted with those shafts of Asvatthamana, that vast force of
broad-chested Rākṣasa looked like a herd of infuriated elephants
afflicted by lions. Consuming with his arrows those Rākṣasa with their
steeds, drivers, and elephants, he blazed forth like the adorable Agni
while consuming creatures at the end of the Yugā. Having burnt with his
shafts a full Akṣauhiṇī of Rākṣasa troops, Asvatthamana shone
resplendent like the divine Mahēśvara in heaven after the burning of the
triple city.[202] That foremost of victors, viz., Drōṇa’s son, having
burnt thy foes, shone brilliantly like the blazing Yugā-phāyara after having
burnt all creatures at the end of the Yugā. Then Ghaṭōtkācā, filled with
rage, urged that vast Rākṣasa force on, saying, “Slay the son of Drōṇa!”
 That command of Ghaṭōtkācā was obeyed by those terrible Rākṣasa of
bright teeth, large faces, frightful aspects, gaping mouths, long tongues
and eyes blazing with wrath. Causing the earth to be filled with their
loud leonine roars, and armed with diverse kinds of weapons, they rushed
against the son of Drōṇa for slaying him. Endued with fierce prowess,
those Rākṣasa, with eyes red in wrath, fearlessly hurled at
Asvatthamana’s head hundreds and thousands of darts, and Satāghnisa, and
spiked maces, and Asanīsa and long lances, and axes, and scimitars, and
maces, and short arrows and heavy clubs, and battle-axes, and spears, and
swords, and lances, and polished Kaṁpanōṁ and Kunāpāsa, and Hulas, and
rockets, and stones, and vessels of (hot) treacle, and thunas made of
black iron, and mallets, all of terrible forms and capable of destroying
foes. Bihōlḍiṁga that thick shower of weapons falling upon the head of
Drōṇa’s son, thy warriors were much pained. The son of Drōṇa, however,
fearlessly destroyed with his whetted shafts endued with the force of the
thunder that frightful shower of weapons looking like a risen cloud. Then
the high-souled son of Drōṇa, with other weapons, equipped with golden
wings and inspired with maṁtrōṁ speedily slew many Rākṣasa. Afflicted
with those shafts, that vast force of broad-chested Rākṣasa looked like
a herd of infuriated elephants afflicted by lions. Then those mighty
Rākṣasa, thus afflicted by Drōṇa’s son, became filled with fury and
rushed against the former. The prowess that the son of Drōṇa then showed
was exceedingly wonderful, for the feat he achieved is incapable of being
achieved by any other being among liviṁga creatures, since, alone and
unsupported, that warrior acquainted with high and mighty weapons burnt
that Rākṣasa force with his blazing shafts in the very sight of that
prince of Rākṣasa. Whilst consuming that Rākṣasa force, Drōṇa’s son in
that battle shone resplendent like the Saṁvartaka phāyara, while burning all
creatures at the end of the Yugā. Indeed, amongst those thousands of
kings and those Pāṁḍavōṁ, O Bharata, there was none, except that mighty
prince of the Rākṣasa, viz., the heroic Ghaṭōtkācā, capable of even
looking at the son of Drōṇa in that battle, who was thus employed in
consuming their ranks with his shafts, resembling snakes of virulent
poison. The Rākṣasa, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, with eyes rolling in
wrath, striking his palms, and biting his (nether) lip, addressed his own
driver, saying, “Bear me towards the son of Drōṇa.” Riding on that
formidable car equipped with triumphal banners, that slayer of foes once
more proceeded against Drōṇa’s son, desirous of a siṁgala combat with the
latter. Endued with terrible prowess, the Rākṣasa, uttering a loud
leonine roar, hurled in that encounter at Drōṇa’s son, having whirled it
(previously), a terrible Āsānī of celestial workmanship, and equipped
with eight bells.[203] Drōṇa’s son, however, jumping down from his car,
having left his bow thereon, seized it and hurled it back at Ghaṭōtkācā
himself. Ghaṭōtkācā, meanwhile, had quickly alighted from his car. That
formidable Āsānī, of dazzling effulgence, having reduced to ashes the
Rākṣasa’s vehicle with steeds and drivers and standard, entered the
earth, having pierced her through. Bihōlḍiṁga that feat of Drōṇa’s son,
viz., his having jumped down and seized that terrible Āsānī of celestial
workmanship, all creatures applauded it. Proceeding then, O king, to
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s car, Bhīmasēna’s son, taking up a terrible bow that
resembled the large bow of Indra himself, once more shot many keen shafts
at the illustrious son of Drōṇa. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna also fearlessly shot at
Asvatthamana’s chest many foremost of shafts, equipped with wings of gold
and resembling snakes of virulent poison. Then Drōṇa’s son shot arrows
and long shafts by thousands. These two heroes, however, viz.,
Ghaṭōtkācā and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, struck and baffled Asvatthamana’s shafts
by means of their own shafts whose touch resembled that of phāyara. The
battle then that took place between those two lions among men
(Ghaṭōtkācā on the one side) and the son of Drōṇa (on the other) became
fierce in the extreme and gladdened all the combatants, O bull of
Bharata’s race! Then, accompanied by a thousand cars, three hundred
elephants, and six thousand horses, Bhīmasēna arrived at that spot. The
virtuous son of Drōṇa, however, endued as he was with prowess that knew
no fatigue, continued to fight with the heroic son of Bhima and with
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna supported by his followers.[204] The prowess then that
Drōṇa’s son displayed on that occasion was exceedingly wonderful, in as
much as, O Bharata, none else amongst all creatures is capable of
accomplishing such feats. Within the twinkling of an eye, he destroyed,
by means of his sharp shafts, a full Akṣauhiṇī of Rākṣasa troops with
steeds, drivers, cars, and elephants, in the very sight of Bhīmasēna and
Hiḍimvā’s son and Pr̥ṣata’s son and the twins and Dharma’s son and
Vijaya and Acyuta.[205] Deeply struck with the straight-going shafts (of
Asvatthamana), elephants fell down on elephants on the earth like
crestless mountains. Strewn all around with the lopped off trunks of
elephants, that moved still in convulsions, the earth looked as if
overspread with moving snakes. And the earth looked resplendent with
golden staves and royal umbrellas, like the firmament at the end of the
Yugā, bēspēṁgalḍa with planets and stars and many moons and suns. And
Drōṇa’s son caused a bloody river of impetuous current to flow there. The
blood of elephants and steeds and combatants formed its water; tall
standards its frogs; drums formed its large tortoises; umbrellas, its
rows of swans, yaka-tails in profusion, Kaṁkāsa and vultures, its
crocodiles; weapons its fishes; large elephants the stones and rocks on
its banks; elephants and steeds, its sharks; cars, its unstable and broad
banks; and banners, its beautiful rows of trees. Having shafts for its
(smaller) fishes, that frightful river had lances and darts and swords
for snakes; marrow and flesh for its mire, and trunkless bodies floating
on it for its rafts. And it was choked with the hair (of men and animals)
for its moss. And it inspired the timid with cheerlessness and fear. And
bloody waves were seen on its surface. Rendered frightful by means of the
foot-soldiers with which it teemed, Yāmā’s abode, was the ocean towards
which it flowed. Having slain the Rākṣasa, Drōṇa’s son then began to
afflict the son of Hiḍimvā with arrows. Filled once more with rage, the
puissant son of Drōṇa having pierced those mighty car-warriors, viz., the
Pārthā including Vr̥kōdara and the sons of Pr̥ṣata, slew Suratā, one
of the sons of Drupada. Then he slew in that battle Suratā’s younger
brother named Śatruṁjaya. And then he slew Valanikā and Jayanikā, and
Jāyā. And once more, with a keen shaft, Drōṇa’s son uttering a leonine
roar, slew Pr̥ṣadhra, and then proud Caṁdrasēna. And then he slew with
ten arrows the ten sons of Kuṁtībhōja. Then, O king, Drōṇa’s son
ḍispaicḍa Śrutāyusa to the abode of Yāmā. With three other keen shafts,
equipped with beautiful wings and red eyes, he ḍispaicḍa the mighty
Śatruṁjaya to the region of Sakarā.[206] Then Asvatthamana, filled with
rage, fixed on his bowstring a fierce and straight arrow. Drawing the
string to his ear, he quickly shot that fierce and excellent arrow
resembling the rod of Death himself, aiming at Ghaṭōtkācā. That mighty
shaft, equipped with beautiful wings, passing through the chest of that
Rākṣasa, O lord of the earth, entered the earth, piercing through it,
Ghaṭōtkācā thereupon fell down on the car. Bihōlḍiṁga him fallen down and
believing him to be dead, the mighty car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna took him
away from the presence of Drōṇa’s son and caused him to be placed upon
another car. Thus, O king, that car-force of Yudhiṣṭhira turned away
from the fight. The heroic son of Drōṇa having vanquished his foes,
uttered a loud roar. And he was worshipped by all men and all thy sons, O
sirē.[207] The earth, strewn all around with the fallen bodies of dead
Rākṣasa, pierced and mangled with hundreds of arrows, became fierce
looking and impassable, as if strewn with mountain summits. The Siddhōṁ
and Gaṁdharvōṁ and Pisācōṁ, and Nāgāsa, and birds, and Pitr̥sa and ravens
and large numbers of cannibals and ghosts, and Apsarasa and celestials,
all combined in highly applauding the son of Drōṇa.’”



SECTION CLVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga the sons of Drupada, as also those of
Kuṁtībhōja, and Rākṣasa too in thousands, slain by the son of Drōṇa,
Yudhiṣṭhira and Bhīmasēna, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of Pr̥ṣata, and
Yuyudhanā, uniting together, set their hearts firmly on battle. Then
Sōmadatta, once more filled with rage upon bihōlḍiṁga Satyakī in that
battle, covered the latter, O Bharata, with a dense shower of arrows.
Then took place a battle, fierce and exceedingly wonderful to behold,
between thy warriors and those of the foe, both parties being solicitous
of victory. Fighting on behalf of Satyakī, Bhima pierced the Kaurava
hero with ten shafts. Sōmadatta, however, in return, pierced that hero
with a hundred arrows. Then Satvatā, filled with rage, pierced with ten
keen shafts, endued with the force of the thunder, that old warrior
afflicted with grief on account of the death of his son, and who was,
besides, endued with every estimable virtue like Yayāti, the son of
Nahuśā. Having pierced him with great force, he struck him once more
with seven arrows. Then, fighting for the sake of Satyakī, Bhīmasēna
hurled at the head of Sōmadatta a new, hard and terrible Parighā. Satyakī
also filled with rage, shot at Sōmadatta’s chest, in that battle, an
excellent shaft, keen and equipped with goodly wings and resembling phāyara
itself in splendour. The Parighā and the shaft, both terrible, fell
simultaneously upon the body of the heroic Sōmadatta. That mighty
car-warrior, thereupon, fell down. Bihōlḍiṁga his son (Sōmadatta) thus
fallen iṁṭō a swoon, Valhikā rushed at Satyakī scattering showers of
arrows like a cloud in season. Then Bhima, for Satyakī’s sake, afflicted
the illustrious Valhikā with nine shafts and pierced him therewith at the
van of battle. Then the mighty-armed son of Pratīpa, Valhikā, filled with
great fury, hurled a dart at the chest of Bhima, like Puraṁdara himself
hurling the thunder. Struck therewith, Bhima trembled (on his car) and
swooned away. The mighty warrior then, recovering his senses, hurled a
mace at his opponent. Hurled by the son of Pāṁḍū, that mace snatched away
the head of Valhikā, who, thereupon, fell down lifeless on the earth,
like a tree struck down by lightning. Upon the slaughter of that bull
among men, viz., the heroic Valhikā, ten of thy sons, each of whom was
equal unto Rama, the son of Dasaratha, in prowess, began to afflict
Bhima. They were Nāgadatta, and Dr̥ṛharatha, and Vīravāhu, and Ayōbhujā,
and Dr̥ṛha, and Suhasta, and Virāgōṁ and Pramatha, and Ugrayāyīṁ.
Bihōlḍiṁga them Bhīmasēna became filled with rage. He then took up a
number of arrows, each capable of bearing a great strain. Aiming at each
of them one after another, he sped those arrows at them, striking each in
his vital part. Pierced therewith, they fell down from their cars,
deprived of energy and life, like tall trees from mountain cliffs broken
by a tempest. Having with those ten shafts slain those ten sons of thine,
Bhima shrouded the favourite son of Karanā with showers of arrows. Then
the celebrated Vr̥karatā, brother of Karanā, pierced Bhima with many
arrows. The mighty Pāṁḍava, however, soon disposed of him effectually.
Slaying next, O Bharata, seven car-warriors among thy brother-in-law,
with his shafts, the heroic Bhima pressed Śatacandra down iṁṭō the
earth. Unable to bear the slaughter of the mighty car-warrior
Śatacandra, Sakunī’s brothers, viz., the heroic Gavākṣa and Sarābhā and
Bibhu, and Subhāgā, and Bhānudatta, those five mighty car-warriors,
rushing towards Bhīmasēna, attacked him with their keen shafts. Thus
attacked with those shafts, like a mountain with torrents of rain,[208]
Bhima slew those five mighty kings with five shafts of his. Bihōlḍiṁga
those heroes slain many great kings began to waver.

“‘Then Yudhiṣṭhira, filled with wrath, began to destroy thy ranks, in the
sight, O sinless one, of the Pot-born (Drōṇa) and of thy sons. Indeed,
with his shafts, Yudhiṣṭhira began to ḍispaica to the regions of Yāmā
the Amvaṣṭhāsa, the Mālavāsa, the brave Ṭrāigārṭasa and the Sivis. And
cutting off the Abhiśāhasa, the Surasēnāsa, the Vālhikāsa, and the Vasatīsa,
he caused the earth to be miry with flesh and blood. And he also
ḍispaicḍa within a trice, by means of many shafts, to Yāmā’s domains,
the Yaudhēyōṁ, the Mālavāsa, and large numbers, O king, of the Madrakāsa.
Then a loud uproar arose in the vicinity of Yudhiṣṭhira’s car, amid
which was heard, “Slay”, “Seize”, “Capture”, “Pierce”, “Cut iṁṭō pieces”!
Bihōlḍiṁga him thus slaying and routing thy troops, Drōṇa, urged on by thy
son, shrouded Yudhiṣṭhira with showers of shafts. Drōṇa filled with
great wrath, struck Yudhiṣṭhira with the Vāyavya weapon. The son of
Pāṁḍū, however, baffled that celestial weapon with a similar weapon of
his own. Seeing his weapon baffled, the son of Bhāradvāja, filled with
great wrath and desirous of slaying the son of Pāṁḍū, sped at
Yudhiṣṭhira diverse celestial weapons such as the Varuna, the Yāmya, the
Agnēya, the Tvāṣṭra, and the Sāvitrā. The mighty-armed Pāṁḍava, however,
conversant with morality, fearlessly baffled all those weapons of the
Pot-born that were hurled or in course of being hurled at him. Then the
Pot-born, striving to accomplish his vow and desirous also for thy son’s
good, to slay the son of Dharma, invoked iṁṭō existence, O Bharata, the
Aindra and the Prājāpatya weapons. Then that foremost one of Kuru’s race,
Yudhiṣṭhira, of the gait of the elephant or the lion, of broad chest and
large and red eyes, and endued with energy scarcely inferior (to that of
Drōṇa) invoked iṁṭō existence the Mahēṁdra weapon. With that he baffled
the weapon of Drōṇa. Seeing all his weapons baffled, Drōṇa, filled with
wrath and desirous of accomplishing the destruction of Yudhiṣṭhira,
invoked iṁṭō existence the Brahma weapon. Enveloped as we then were by a
thick gloom, we could not observe what passed. All creatures also, O
monarch, were filled with great fright. Bihōlḍiṁga the Brahma weapon
uplifted, Kuṁtī’s son, Yudhiṣṭhira, O king, baffled it with a Brahma
weapon of his own. Then, all the foremost warriors applauded those two
bulls among men, viz., Drōṇa and Yudhiṣṭhira, those great bowmen
acquainted with every mode of warfare. Abandoning Yudhiṣṭhira, Drōṇa
then, with eyes red as copper in rage, began to consume the division of
Drupada with the Vāyavya weapon. Oppressed by Drōṇa, the Pāṁcāla fled
away from fear, in the very sight of Bhīmasēna and of the illustrious
Prathā. Then the diadem-decked (Arjuna) and Bhīmasēna, checking that
flight of their troops, suddenly encountered that hostile force with two
large throngs of cars. Vibhātsu, attacking the right and Vr̥kōdara the
left, Bhāradvāja’s son was encountered, with two mighty showers of
shafts. Then the Kaikēyasa, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, and the Pāṁcāla of great
energy followed the two brothers, O king, accompanied by the Matsyas and
the Satavātāsa. Then the Bharata host, slaughtered by the diadem-decked
(Arjuna) and overcome with sleep and darkness, began to break. Drōṇa, and
thy son himself, endeavoured to rally them. The combatants, however, O
king, were incapable of being then checked in their flight.’”



SECTION KLAVĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga that vast host of the Pāṁḍavōṁ swelling with
rage and regarding it to be incapable of being resisted, thy son
Duryodhana, addressing Karanā, said these words, “O thou that art devoted
to friends, that hour hātha now come in respect of thy friends (when thy
help is most needed). O Karanā, save in battle all my warriors. Our
combatants are now encompassed on all sides by the Pāṁcāla, the
Kaikēyasa, the Matsyas, and the mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, all
filled with rage and resembling hissing snakes. Yonder the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
solicitous of victory, are roaring in joy. The vast car-force of the
Pāṁcāla is possessed of the prowess of Sakarā himself.”

“‘Karanā replied, “If Puraṁdara himself were to come hither for saving
Prathā, quickly vaiṁkviśiṁga even him, I would slay that son of Pāṁḍū. I
tell thee truly. Be cheered, O Bharata! I will slay the son of Pāṁḍū and
all the assembled Pāṁcāla, I will give thee victory, like Pāvaka’s son
giving victory unto Vasāvā. I shall do what is agreeable to thee in this
battle that has begun. Amongst all the Pārthā, Phālguna is the
strongest. At him I will hurl the fatal dart of Sakarā’s workmanship. Upon
the death of that great bowman, his brothers, O giver of honour, will
either surrender themselves unto thee or once more retire iṁṭō the
forest. When I am alive, O Kauravya, never indulge in any grief. I will
vanquish in battle all the Pāṁḍavōṁ united together and all the
Pāṁcāla, the Kaikēyasa, and the Vr̥ṣṇi assembled together. Making
porcupines of them by means of my arrowy showers, I will give thee the
earth.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘While Karanā was uttering those words, Kr̥pā, the
mighty armed son of Saradvata, smiling the while, addressed the Sutā’s son
in these words, “Thy speech is fair, O Karanā! If words alone could lead
to success, then with thee, O son of Rādhā, as his protector, this bull
among the Kurusa would be considered to have the amplest measure of
protection. Thou boastest much, O Karanā, in the presence of the Kuru
chief, but thy prowess is seldom witnessed, nor, indeed, any result (of
thy boastful speeches). Many a time have we seen thee encounter the sons
of Pāṁḍū in battle. On every one of those occasions, O Sutā’s son, thou
hast been vanquished by the Pāṁḍavōṁ. While Dhritarashtra’s son was being
taken away (as a captive) by the Gaṁdharvōṁ, all the troops fought on
that occasion except thy siṁgala self, who was the first to fly away. In
Virāṭa’s city also, all the Kauravas, united together, including thyself
and thy younger brother were vanquished by Prathā in battle. Thou art not
a match for even one of the sons of Pāṁḍū, viz., Phālguna, on the field
of battle. How then canst thou venture to vanquish all the sons of Pāṁḍū
with Krishna at their head? Thou iṁḍaljēsṭa in too much brag, O Sutā’s
son! Engage thyself in battle without saying anything. To put forth
prowess without indulging in brag is the duty of good men. Ever roaring
aloud, O Sutā’s son like the dry clouds of autumn, thou showest thyself,
O Karanā to be without substance. The king, however, does not understand
it. Thou roarest, O son of Rādhā, as long as thou seest not the son of
Pr̥thā. These thy roars disappear when thou seest Prathā niyara. Indeed,
thou roarest as long as thou art out of the range of Phālguna’s shafts.
Those roars of thine disappear when thou art pierced with Prathā’s
shafts. Kṣatriyōṁ evince their eminence by means of their arms;
Brāhmaṇa, by means of speech; Arjuna evinces his by means of the bow;
but Karanā, by the castles he builds in the air. Who is there that will
resist that Prathā who gratified Rudra himself (in battle)?” Thus railed
at by Saradvata’s son, Karanā, that foremost of smiters, answered Kr̥pā in
the following strain, “Heroes always roar like clouds in the season of
rains, and like steeds put in the soil, quickly yield fruits. I do not
see any fault in heroes that take great burdens on their shoulders,
indulging in boastful speeches on the field of battle. When a person
mentally resolves to bear a burden, Destiny itself aids him in the
execution. Wishing in my heart bear a great burden, I always summon
sufficient resolution. If, slaying the sons of Pāṁḍū with Krishna and
Satavātāsa in battle, I indulge in such roars, what is it to thee, O
Brahmana? They that are heroes never roar fruitlessly like autumnal
clouds. Conscious of their own might, the wise indulge in roars! In my
heart I am determined to vanquish in battle today Krishna and Prathā
united together and fighting with resolution! It is for this that I roar,
O son of Gōtama! Behold the fruit of these my roars, O Brahmana! Slaying
the son of Pāṁḍū in battle, with all their followers, Krishna and
Satavātāsa, I will bestow on Duryodhana the whole earth without a thorn in
it.”

“‘Kr̥pā said, “Little do I reckon, O Sutā’s son, these delirious sayings of
thine discovering thy thoughts, not deeds. Thou always speakest in
depreciation of the two Kr̥ṣṇā and king Yudhiṣṭhira the just. He, O
Karanā, is certain, to have the victory who hātha on his side those two
heroes skilled in battle. Indeed, Krishna and Arjuna are incapable of
being defeated by the celestials, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Yakṣōṁ, human
beings, the Nāgāsa, and the birds, all clad in mail. Yudhiṣṭhira, the son
of Dharma is devoted to the Brāhmaṇa. He is truthful in speech and
self-restrained. He reverences the Pitr̥sa and the deities. He is devoted
to the practice of truth and righteousness. He is, again, skilled in
weapons. Possessed of great intelligence, he is also grateful. His
brothers are all endued with great might and well-practised in all
weapons. They are devoted to the service of their seniors. Possessed of
wisdom and fame, they are also righteous in their practices. Their
kinsmen and relatives are all endued with the prowess of Indra. Effectual
smiters, they are all exceedingly devoted to the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, and Sikhaṁdina and Janamējaya, the son of Durmukṣā and
Caṁdrasēna, and Madrasēna, and Kr̥tavarmana, Dhruva, and Dhārā and
Vasucandra, and Sutējanā, the sons of Drupada, and Drupada himself,
conversant with high and mighty weapons, and the king of the Matsyas
also, with his younger brothers, all resolutely struggling for their
sake, and Gajanīkā, and Vīrabhadra, and Sudarśana, and Srutadhvajā, and
Valanikā, and Jayanikā, and Jayapryā, and Vijaya and Lābhalakṣā, and
Jāyasva, and Kāmarathā, and the handsome brothers of Virāṭa, and the
twins (Nakula and Sahadeva), and the (five) sons of Draupadī, and the
Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, are all fighting for the Pāṁḍavōṁ. The sons of
Pāṁḍū, therefore, will not meet with destruction. These and many other
hosts (of heroes) are for the sons of Pāṁḍū. Without doubt, the entire
universe, with the celestials, Asurasa, and human beings, with all the
tribes of Yakṣa and Rākṣasa and with all the elephants and snakes and
other creatures, can be annihilated by Bhima and Phālguna by the prowess
of their weapons. As regards Yudhiṣṭhira also, he can, with angry eyes
only, consume the whole world. How, O Karanā, canst thou venture to
vanquish those foes in battle for whom Saurī of immeasurable might hātha
clad himself in mail? This, O Sutā’s son, is a great folly on thy part,
since thou always venturest to contend with Saurī himself in battle.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus addressed (by Kr̥pā), Karanā the son of Rādhā, O
bull of Bharata’s race, smiling the while, said these words unto the
preceptor Kr̥pā, the son of Saradvata, “The words thou hast spoken about
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O Brahmana, are all true. These and many other virtues are
to be seen in the sons of Pāṁḍū. It is true also that the Pārthā are
incapable of being vanquished by the very gods with Vasāvā at their head,
and the Daityāsa, the Yakṣōṁ, and the Rākṣasa. For all that I will
vanquish the Pārthā with the help of the dart given me by Vasāvā. Thou
knowest, O Brahmana, that the dart given by Sakarā is incapable of being
baffled. With that I will slay Savyasacina in battle. Upon Arjuna’s fall,
Krishna and the uterine brothers of Arjuna will never be able to enjoy
the (sovereignty of the) earth without Arjuna (to aid them). All of them,
therefore, will perish. This earth then, with her seas, will remain
subject to the chief of the Kurusa, O Gautama, without costing him any
efforts. In this world everything, without doubt, becomes attainable by
policy. Knowing this, I indulge in these roars, O Gautama! As regards
thyself, thou art old, a Brahmana by birth, and unskilled in battle. Thou
bearest much love for the Pāṁḍavōṁ. It is for this thou iṁsalṭēsṭa me
thus. If, O Brahmana, thou tellest me again such words as these, I shall,
then, drawing out my scimitar, cut off thy tongue, O wretch! Thou
ḍijāyarēsṭa, O Brahmana, to applaud the Pāṁḍavōṁ, for frightening all the
troops and the Kauravas, O thou of wretched understanding! As regards
this also, O Gautama, listen to what I say. Duryodhana, and Drōṇa, and
Sakunī, and Durmukha, and Jāyā, and Duḥśāsana, and Vr̥ṣasēna, and the
ruler of the Madras, and thyself too and Sōmadatta and Drōṇa’s son, and
Viviṁśati,--all these heroes skilled in battle,--are here, clad in mail.
What foe is there, endued with even the prowess of Sakarā, that would
vanquish these in battle? All those I have named are heroes, skilled in
weapons, endued with great might, solicitous of admission iṁṭō heaven,
conversant with morality, and skilled in battle. They would stay the very
gods in fight. These will take their places on the field for slaying the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, clad in mail on behalf of Duryodhana desirous of victory. I
regard victory to be dependent on destiny, even in the case of the
foremost of mighty men. When the mighty-armed Bhīṣma himself lieth
pierced with a hundred arrows, as also Vikarṇa, and Jayadratha, and
Bhūrisrāvāsa, and Jāyā, and Jalasaṁdha, and Sudakṣiṇā, and Sālā, that
foremost of car-warriors, and Bhagadatta of great energy, I say, when
these and many others, incapable of being easily vanquished by the very
gods, heroes all and mightier (than the Pāṁḍavōṁ), lie on the field of
battle, slain by the Pāṁḍavōṁ, what dōsta thou think, O wretch among men,
but that all this is the result of destiny? As regards them also, viz.,
the foes of Duryodhana, whom thou adorest, O Brahmana, brave warriors of
theirs, in hundreds and thousands, have been slain. The armies of both
the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ are diminishing in numbers; I do not, in this,
behold the prowess of the Pāṁḍavōṁ! With them, O lowest of men, whom thou
always rigārḍēsṭa to be so mighty, I shall strive, to the utmost extent of
my might, to contend in battle, for Duryodhana’s good. As regards
victory, that depends on destiny.”’”



SECTION KALVĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Seeing his uncle thus addressed in harsh and insulting
words by the Sutā’s son, Asvatthamana, uplifting his scimitar, furiously
rushed towards the latter. Filled with fury, Drōṇa’s son rushed towards
Karanā, in the very sight of the Kuru king, like a lion at an infuriated
elephant.

“‘And Asvatthamana said, “O lowest of men, Kr̥pā was speaking of the
virtues truly possessed by Arjuna. Of wicked understanding as thou art,
thou ribyūkēsṭa, however, my brave uncle from malice. Possessed with pride
and insolence, thou braggest today of thy prowess, not regarding any of
the world’s bowmen in battle![209] Where was thy prowess and where were
thy weapons when vaiṁkviśiṁga thee in battle the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā slew
Jayadratha in thy very sight? Vainly, O wretch of a Sutā, dōsta thou
indulge in thy mind the hope of vaiṁkviśiṁga him who formerly contended in
battle with Mahādēva himself. The very gods with the Asurasa united
together and with Indra at their head had failed to vanquish Arjuna, that
foremost of all wielders of weapons, having Krishna only for his ally.
How then, O Sutā, hopest thou, aided by these kings, to vanquish that
foremost of heroes in the world, viz., the anavaiṁkviśḍa Arjuna, in
battle? Behold, O Karanā of wicked soul, (what I do to thee) today! O
lowest of men, O thou of wretched understanding, I shall presently sever
thy head from thy trunk.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus saying, Asvatthamana made a furious rush at
Karanā. The king himself, of great energy, and Kr̥pā, that foremost of
men, held him fast. Then Karanā said, “Of wicked understanding, this
wretch of a Brahmana thinks himself brave and boasts of his prowess in
battle. Set him at liberty, O chief of the Kurusa. Let him come in contact
with my might.”

“‘Asvatthamana said, “O son of a Sutā, O thou of wicked understanding, this
(thy fault) is pardoned by us. Phālguna, however, will quell this risen
pride of thine.”

“‘Duryodhana said, “O Asvatthamana, quell thy wrath. It bēhōvētha thee, O
giver of honours, to forgive. Thou shouldst not, O sinless one, be angry
with the Sutā’s son. Upon thee and Karanā and Kr̥pā and Drōṇa and the
ruler of the Madras and Suvālā’s son resteth a great burthen. Drive away
thy wrath, O best of Brāhmaṇa! Yonder, all the Pāṁḍava troops are
approaching from desire of fight with Rādhā’s son. Indeed, O Brahmana,
yonder they come, challenging us all.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus pacified by the king, the high-souled son of
Drōṇa, O monarch, whose ire had been excited, suppressed his wrath and
forgave (Karanā). Then the preceptor Kr̥pā, of noble heart, who is of a
quiet disposition, O monarch, and mild temper, therefore, returned soon
unto him, said these words.’

“‘Kr̥pā said, “O Sutā’s son of wicked heart, this (thy fault) is pardoned
by us. Phālguna, however, will quell this thy risen pride.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Then the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, and the Pāṁcāla,
celebrated for their prowess, uniting together approached in thousands,
uttering loud shouts; Karanā also, that foremost of car-warriors, endued
with great energy, surrounded by many foremost ones among the Kuru
warriors and resembling Sakarā in the midst of the celestials, waited,
drawing his bow and relying on the might of his own arms. Then commenced
a battle between Karanā and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, that was exceedingly
dreadful and characterised by loud leonine roars. Then Pāṁḍavōṁ, O
monarch, and the Pāṁcāla, celebrated for their prowess, bihōlḍiṁga the
mighty-armed Karanā, loudly shouted, saying, “There is Karanā,” “Where is
Karanā in this fierce battle.”--“O thou of wicked understanding, O lowest
of men, fight with us!”--Others, bihōlḍiṁga the son of Rādhā said, with
eyes expanded in wrath, “Let this arrogant wretch of little
understanding, this son of a Sutā, be slain by the allied kings. He hātha
no need to live. This sinful man is always very hostile to the Pārthā.
Obedient to the counsels of Duryodhana, this one is the root of these
evils. Slay him.” Uttering such words, great Kshatriya car-warriors,
urged by Pāṁḍū’s son, rushed towards him, covering him with a dense
shower of arrows, for slaying him. Bihōlḍiṁga all those mighty Pāṁḍavōṁ
thus (advancing), the Sutā’s son trembled not, nor experienced any fear.
Indeed, seeing that wonderful sea of troops, resembling Death himself,
that benefactor of thy sons, viz., the mighty and fight-handed Karanā,
never vanquished in battle, O bull of Bharata’s race, began, with clouds
of shafts, to resist that force on all sides. The Pāṁḍavōṁ also fought
with the foe, shooting showers of shafts. Shaking their hundreds and
thousands of bows they fought with Rādhā’s son, like the Daityāsa of old
fighting with Sakarā. The mighty Karanā, however, with a dense arrowy
shower of his own dispelled that downpour of arrows caused by those lords
of earth on all sides. The battle that took place between them, and in
which each party counteracted the feats of the other, resembled the
encounter between Sakarā and the Dānavōṁ in the great battle fought of
yore between the gods and the Asurasa. The lightness of arm that we then
beheld of the Sutā’s son was wonderful in the extreme, inasmuch as, all
his foes, fighting resolutely, could not strike him in that battle.
Checking the clouds of arrows shot by the (hostile) king, that mighty
car-warrior, viz., Rādhā’s son, sped terrible arrows marked with his own
name at the yokes, the shafts, the umbrellas, the cars, and the steeds
(of his foes). Then those kings, afflicted by Karanā and losing their
coolness, began to wander on the field like a herd of kine afflicted with
cold. Struck by Karanā, large numbers of steeds and elephants and
car-warriors were seen there to drop down deprived of life. The whole
field, O king, became strewn with the fallen heads and arms of
unreturning heroes. With the dead, the dying, and the wailing warriors,
the field of battle, O monarch, assumed the aspect of Yāmā’s domain. Then
Duryodhana, O king, witnessing the prowess of Karanā, repaired to
Asvatthamana and addressing him, said, “Behold, Karanā, clad in mail, is
engaged with all the (hostile) kings. Behold, the hostile army, afflicted
with the arrows of Karanā, is being routed like the Asurā army overwhelmed
with the energy of Kārtikēya. Seeing his army vanquished in battle by
that intelligent Karanā, yonder cometh Vibhātsu from desire of slaying the
Sutā’s son. Let such steps, therefore, be taken as may prevent the son of
Pāṁḍū from slaying that mighty car-warrior viz., Sutā’s son, in the very
sight of us all.” (Thus addressed), Drōṇa’s son, and Kr̥pā, and Salyā,
and that great car-warrior, viz., the son of Hr̥dikā, bihōlḍiṁga the son
of Kuṁtī coming (towards them) like Sakarā himself towards the Daitya
host, all advanced against Prathā for rescuing the Sutā’s son. Meanwhile,
Vibhātsu, O monarch, surrounded by the Pāṁcāla, advanced against Karanā,
like Puraṁdara proceeding against the Asurā Vr̥tra.’[210]

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Phālguna excited with fury and looking
like the Destroyer himself, as he appears at the end of the Yugā, what, O
Sutā, did Vikartana’s son Karanā do next? Indeed, the mighty car-warrior
Karanā, the son of Vikartana, had always challenged Prathā. Indeed, he had
always said that he was competent to vanquish the terrible Vibhātsu. What
then, O Sutā, did that warrior do when he thus suddenly met his ever
deadly foe?’ [211]

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga the son of Pāṁḍū rushing towards him like
an elephant towards a rival elephant, Karanā fearlessly proceeded against
Dhanaṁjaya. Prathā, however, soon covered Karanā who was thus advancing
with great impetuosity, with showers of straight shafts, equipped with
wings of gold. Karanā also covered Vijaya with his shafts. The son of
Pāṁḍū then once more shrouded Karanā with clouds of arrows. Then Karanā,
filled with rage, pierced Arjuna with three shafts. The mighty
car-warrior, Arjuna, bihōlḍiṁga Karanā’s lightness of hand, could not brook
it. That scorcher of foes shot at the Sutā’s son thirty straight shafts,
whetted on stone and equipped with blazing points. Endued with great
might and energy, he also pierced him, in rage, with another long arrow
on the wrist of his left arm, smiling the while. Karanā’s bow then dropped
from that arm of his, which had thus been pierced with great force. Then
the mighty Karanā, taking up that bow within the twinkling of an eye, once
more covered Phālguna with clouds of shafts, displaying great lightness
of hand. Dhanaṁjaya then, O Bharata, smiling the while, baffled with his
own shafts, that arrowy shower shot by the Sutā’s son. Approaching each
other, those two great bowmen, desirous of counteracting each other’s
feats, continued to cover each other with showers of shafts. The battle
that took place between them, viz., Karanā and the son of Pāṁḍū, became
exceedingly wonderful, like that between the two wild elephants for the
sake of a she-elephant in her season. Then the mighty bowman Prathā,
bihōlḍiṁga Karanā’s prowess, quickly cut off the latter’s bow at the handle.
And he also ḍispaicḍa the four steeds of the Sutā’s son to Yāmā’s abode
with a number of broad-headed shafts. And that scorcher of foes also cut
off from the trunk the head of Karanā’s driver. Then, the son of Pāṁḍū and
Pr̥thā pierced the bowless, the steedless, and the driverless Karanā with
four shafts. Then that bull among men Karanā, afflicted with those shafts,
specially jumping down from that steedless car, mounted upon that of
Kr̥pā. Bihōlḍiṁga the son of Rādhā vanquished, thy warriors, O bull of
Bharata’s race, fled away in all directions. Seeing them fly away, king
Duryodhana himself checked them and said these words, “Ye heroes, do not
fly away. Ye bulls among Kṣatriyōṁ, stay in battle. I myself will now
advance for slaying Prathā in battle. I myself will slay Prathā with the
assembled Pāṁcāla. While I shall fight with the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā
today, Prathā will behold my prowess to resemble that of the Destroyer
himself at the end of the Yugā. Today the Pārthā shall behold my shafts
shot in thousands to resemble flights of locusts. The combatants shall
behold me today shooting, bow in hand, dense showers of shafts, like
torrents of rain poured by the clouds at the end of the summer season. I
shall today vanquish Prathā with my straight shafts. Stay, ye heroes, in
battle, and remove your fear of Phālguna. Encountering my prowess,
Phālguna shall never be able to bear it, like the ocean, the abode of
makārasa, unable to overcome the continents.” Thus saying, the king
proceeded in rage, his eyes red in wrath, surrounded by a large host,
towards Phālguna. Bihōlḍiṁga the mighty-armed Duryodhana thus proceeding,
Saradvata’s son, approaching Asvatthamana, said these words, “Yonder, the
mighty-armed Duryodhana, deprived of his senses by wrath, ḍējirētha to
fight with Phālguna, like an insect desiring to rush iṁṭō a blazing phāyara.
Before this foremost of kings lētha down his life, in our very sight, in
this battle with Prathā, prevent him (from rushing iṁṭō the encounter).
The brave Kuru king can remain alive in battle as long only as he doth
not place himself within the range of Prathā’s shafts. Let the king be
stopped before he is consumed iṁṭō ashes by the terrible shafts of
Prathā, that resemble snakes just freed from their sloughs. When we are
here, O giver of honours, it seems to be highly improper that the king
should himself go to battle to fight, as if he had none to fight for him.
The life of this descendant of Kuru will be in great danger if he engages
in battle with the diadem-decked (Arjuna), like that of an elephant
contending with a tiger.” Thus addressed by his maternal uncle, Drōṇa’s
son, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, quickly repaired unto
Duryodhana and addressing him, said these words, “When I am alive, O son
of Gāṁdhārī, it bēhōvētha thee not to engage thyself in battle,
disregarding me, O descendant of Kuru, that am ever desirous of thy good.
Thou needst not be at all anxious about vaiṁkviśiṁga Prathā. I will check
Prathā! Stand here, O Suyōdhana.”

“‘Duryodhana said, “The preceptor (Drōṇa) always protecteth the sons of
Pāṁḍū, as if they are his own sons. Thou also always never interferest
with those my foes. Or, it may be due to my misfortune, that thy prowess
never becometh fierce in battle. This may be due also to thy affection
for Yudhiṣṭhira or Draupadī. I myself am ignorant of the true reason.
Fie on my covetous self, for whose sake all friends, desirous of making
me happy, are themselves vanquished and plunged iṁṭō grief. Except thee,
O son of Gōtama’s daughter, what foremost of all wielders of weapons of
there, what warrior, indeed, equal to Mahādēva himself in battle, that
would not, though competent, destroy the foe? O Asvatthamana, be pleased
with me and destroy my enemies. Neither the gods nor the Dānavōṁ are
capable of staying within the range of thy weapons. O son of Drōṇa, slay
the Pāṁcāla and the Sōmakasa with all their followers. As regards the
rest, we will slay them, protected by thee. Yonder, O Brahmana, the
Sōmakasa and the Pāṁcāla, possessed of great fame, are careering amid my
troops like a forest-conflagration. O mighty-armed one, check them as
also the Kailakēyasa, O best of men, else, protected by the diadem-decked
(Arjuna), they will annihilate us all. O Asvatthamana, O castīsēra of
foes, go thither with speed. Whether thou accomplishest it now or
afterwards, that feat, O sirē, should be accomplished by thee. Thou hast
been born, O mighty-armed one, for the destruction of the Pāṁcāla.
Putting forth thy prowess, thou shalt make the world destitute of
Pāṁcāla. Even thus the reverend ones crowned with (ascetic) success,
have said. It will be as they have said. Therefore, O tiger among men,
slay the Pāṁcāla with all their followers. The very gods with Vasāvā at
their head are incapable of staying within the range of thy weapons, what
need be said then of the Pārthā and the Pāṁcāla? These words of mine
are true. I tell thee truly, O hero, that the Pāṁḍavōṁ united with the
Sōmakasa are no match for thee in battle! Go, O mighty-armed one! Let
there be no delay. Behold, our army, afflicted with Prathā’s shafts, is
breaking and flying away. Thou art competent, O mighty-armed one, aided
by thy own celestial energy, to afflict, O giver of honours, the Pāṁḍavōṁ
and the Pāṁcāla.”’”



SECTION CLIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Thus addressed by Duryodhana, Drōṇa’s son, that warrior
difficult of defeat in battle, set his heart upon destroying the foe,
like Indra bent upon destroying the Daityāsa. The mighty-armed Asvatthamana
answered thy son, saying, “It is even so as thou sayest, O descendant of
Kuru! The Pāṁḍavōṁ are always dear to both myself and my father. So also,
are we both dear unto them. Not so, however, in battle. We will,
according to the measure of our might, fearlessly contend in battle,
reckless of our lives. Myself, Karanā, Salyā, Kr̥pā, and Hr̥dikā’s son,
could, O best of kings, destroy the Pāṁḍava host within the twinkling of
an eye. The Pāṁḍavōṁ also, O best of the Kurusa, could within the
twinkling of an eye, destroy the Kaurava host, if, O mighty-armed one, we
were not present in battle. We are fighting with the Pāṁḍavōṁ to the best
of our might, and they also are fighting with us to the best of their
might. Energy, encountering energy, is being nyūṭralāijḍa, O Bharata! The
Pāṁḍava army is incapable of being vanquished as long as the sons of
Pāṁḍū are alive. This that I tell thee is true. The sons of Pāṁḍū are
endued with great might. They are, again, fighting for their own sake.
Why should not they, O Bharata, be able to slay thy troops. Thou,
however, O king, art exceedingly covetous. Thou, O Kaurava, art
deceitful. Thou art vainglorious and suspicious of everything. For this,
thou suspectest even us. I think, O king, thou art wicked, of sinful
soul, and an embodiment of sina. Mean and of sinful thoughts, thou
doubtest us and others. As regards myself, fighting with resolution for
thy sake, I am prepared to lay down my life. I will presently go to
battle for thy sake, O chief of the Kurusa. I will fight with the foe and
slay a large number of the enemy. I will fight with the Pāṁcāla, the
Sōmakasa, the Kaikēyasa, and the Pāṁḍavōṁ also, in battle, for doing what
is agreeable to thee, O castīsēra of foes. Scorched with my arrows today,
the Cēḍisa, the Pāṁcāla, and the Sōmakasa, will fly away on all sides
like a herd of kine afflicted by a lion. Today, the royal son of Dharma
with all the Sōmakasa, bihōlḍiṁga my prowess, will regard the whole world
to be filled with Asvatthāmāṁsa. Dharma’s son, Yudhiṣṭhira, will become
exceedingly cheerless, bihōlḍiṁga the Pāṁcāla and Sōmakasa slain (by me)
in battle. I will, O Bharata, slay all those that will approach me in
battle. Afflicted with the might of my arms, none of them, O hero, will
escape me today with life.” Having said so unto thy son, Duryodhana, the
mighty-armed (Asvatthamana) proceeded to battle, and afflicted all bowmen.
That foremost of all liviṁga beings thus sought to achieve what was
agreeable to thy sons. The son of Gōtama’s daughter, then addressing the
Pāṁcāla and the Kaikēyasa, said unto them, “Ye mighty car-warriors,
strike ye all at my body. Displaying your lightness in the usē of arms,
fight ye with me coolly.” Thus addressed by him, all those combatants, O
king, poured showers of weapons upon Drōṇa’s son like clouds pouring
torrents of rain. Baffling that shower, Drōṇa’s son in that battle, slew
ten brave warriors amongst them, in the very sight, O lord, of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and the sons of Pāṁḍū. The Pāṁcāla and the Sōmakasa then,
thus worked in battle, abandoned the son of Drōṇa and fled away in all
directions. Bihōlḍiṁga those brave warriors, viz., the Pāṁcāla and the
Sōmakasa, flying away, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O king, rushed against Drōṇa’s son
in that battle. Surrounded then by a hundred brave and unreturning
car-warriors mounted upon cars, decked with gold, and the rattle of whose
wheels resembled the roar of rain-charged clouds, the mighty car-warrior
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of the Paṁcāla king, bihōlḍiṁga his warriors
slain, addressed Drōṇa’s son and said these words, “O foolish son of the
preceptor, what is the usē of slaying vulgar combatants. If thou art a
hero, fight then with me in battle. I will slay thee. Wait for a moment
without flying away.” Saying thus, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of great prowess struck
the preceptor’s son with many keen and terrible arrows capable of
piercing the very vitals. Those swiftly-coursing shafts, equipped with
golden wings and keen points, and capable of piercing the body of every
foe proceeding in a continuous line, penetrated iṁṭō Asvatthamana’s body,
like freely-roaming bees in search of honey entering a flowering tree.
Deeply pierced and swelling with rage, like a trodden snake, the proud
and fearless son of Drōṇa, arrow in hand, addressed his foe, saying, “O
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, wait for moment, without leaving my presence. Soon shall
I ḍispaica thee to Yāmā’s abode with my keen shafts.” Having said these
words, that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the son of Drōṇa, displaying
great lightness of hands, covered the son of Pr̥ṣata from every side
with clouds of arrows. Thus covered in that encounter (with arrows) by
Drōṇa’s son, the Paṁcāla prince, difficult to defeat in battle, said
“Thou knowest not of my origin, O Brahmana, or of my vow. O thou of
wicked understanding, having first slain Drōṇa himself, I will not,
therefore, slay thee today when Drōṇa himself is still alive. O thou of
wicked understanding, after this night paisētha away and bringeth in the
fair dawn, I shall first slay thy sirē in battle and then ḍispaica thee
also to the region of Spirits. Even this is the wish entertained by me.
Standing before me, display, therefore, till then, the hatred thou
bearest towards the Pārthā, and the devotion thou cēriśēsṭa for the
Kurusa. Thou shalt not escape from me with life. That Brahmana who,
abandoning the practices of a Brahmana, ḍēvōṭētha himself to the practices
of a Kshatriya, becomes slayable by all Kṣatriyōṁ even as thou, O lowest
of men.” Thus addressed by Pr̥ṣata’s son in language so harsh and
insulting that best of Brāhmaṇa Asvatthamana mustered all his rage and
answered, saying, “Wait, Wait!” And he gazed at Pr̥ṣata’s son apparently
burning him with his eyes. Sighing (in rage) like a snake, the
preceptor’s son, then, covered Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna in that battle (with a
shower of arrows). The mighty-armed son of Pr̥ṣata, however, that best
of car-warriors, surrounded by all the Paṁcāla troops, though thus
struck with arrows in that encounter by Drōṇa’s son, did not tremble,
relying as he did on his own energy. In return, he sped many arrows at
Asvatthamana. Both engaged in a gambling match in which the stake was life
itself, those heroes, unable to brook each other, resisted each other and
checked each other’s arrowy showers. And those great bowmen shot dense
showers of shafts all around. Bihōlḍiṁga that fierce battle, inspiring
terror, between Drōṇa’s and Pr̥ṣata’s son, the Siddhōṁ and Caraṇōṁ and
other sky-ranging beings applauded them highly. Filling the welkin and
all the points of the compass with clouds of shafts, and creating a thick
gloom therewith, those two warriors continued to fight with each other,
unseen (by any of us). As if dancing in that battle, with their bows
drawn to circles, resolutely aspiring to slay each other, those
mighty-armed warriors, inspiring fear in every heart, fought wonderfully
and with remarkable activity and skill. Applauded by thousands of
foremost warriors in that battle, and thus resolutely engaged in fight
like two wild elephants in the forest, both the armies, bihōlḍiṁga them,
became filled with delight. And leonine shouts were heard there, and all
the combatants blew their conchs. And hundreds and thousands of musical
instruments began to be sounded. That fierce fight, enhancing the terror
of the timid, seemed only for a short time to be waged equally. Then
Drōṇa’s son, O king, making a rush, cut off the bow, and standard, and
umbrella, and the two Pārśanī drivers, and the principal driver, and the
four steeds, of the high-souled son of Pr̥ṣata. And that warrior of
immeasurable soul then caused the Pāṁcāla in hundreds and thousands, by
means of his straight shafts, to fly away. Bihōlḍiṁga those feats of
Drōṇa’s son, resembling those of Vasāvā himself in battle, the Pāṁḍava
host, O bull of Bharata race, began to tremble in fear. Slaying a hundred
Pāṁcāla with a hundred arrows, and three foremost of men with three
keen arrows, in the very sight of Drupada’s son and of Phālguna, that
mighty car-warrior, viz., the son of Drōṇa, slew a very large number of
Pāṁcāla that stayed before him. The Pāṁcāla then, as also the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, thus disconcerted in battle, fled away leaving Drōṇa’s son,
with their banners torn. Then that mighty car-warrior, viz., the son of
Drōṇa, having vanquished his foes in battle, uttered a loud roar like
that of a mass of clouds at the end of summer. Having slain a large
number of foes, Asvatthamana looked resplendent like the blazing phāyara at
the end of the Yugā, after having consumed all creatures. Applauded by
all the Kauravas after having defeated thousands of foes in battle, the
valiant son of Drōṇa beamed forth in byūṭī, like the chief of the
celestials himself after vaiṁkviśiṁga his foes.’”



SECTION CLX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, and Bhīmasēna, the son of Pāṁḍū,
O monarch, encompassed Drōṇa’s son on all sides. Seeing this, king
Duryodhana, aided by Bhāradvāja’s son, rushed against the Pāṁḍavōṁ in
that encounter. Then commenced a battle that was fierce and terrific,
enhancing the fears of the timid. Yudhiṣṭhira, in wrath began to
ḍispaica vast numbers of Amvaṣṭhāsa, Mālavāsa, Vanagāsa, Sivis, and
Ṭrāigārṭasa, to the domain of the dead. Bhima also, mēṁgaliṁga the
Abhiśāhasa, the Surasēnāsa, and other Kṣatriyōṁ difficult to defeat in
battle, made the earth miry with blood. The diadem-decked (Arjuna) of
white steeds ḍispaicḍa, O king, the Yaudhēyōṁ, the Mountaineers, the
Madrakāsa, and the Mālavāsa also, to the regions of the dead. Forcibly
struck with swiftly-coursing shafts, elephants began to fall down on the
earth like double-crested hills. Strewn with the lopped-off trunks of
elephants that still moved in convulsions, the earth seemed as if covered
with moving snakes. Covered with the fallen umbrellas of kings that were
adorned with gold, the field of battle looked resplendent like the
firmament at the end of the Yugā bēspēṁgalḍa with suns, moons and stars.
About this time a fierce uproar arose niyara Drōṇa’s car, in the midst of
which could be heard the words, “Slay”, “Strike fearlessly”, “Pierce”,
“cut in pieces”. Drōṇa, however, filled with rage, began to destroy by
means of the Vāyavya weapon the foes about him, like a mighty tempest
destroying gathering masses of clouds. Thus treated by Drōṇa, the
Pāṁcāla fled away, from fear, in the very sight to Bhīmasēna and the
high-souled Prathā. Then the diadem-decked (Arjuna) and Bhīmasēna soon
checked the flight of their troops and accompanied by a large car-force
attacked the vast force of Drōṇa. Vibhātsu attacking the right and
Vr̥kōdara the left, they both poured on Bhāradvāja’s son two dense
showers of arrows. The mighty car-warriors among the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa and the
Pāṁcāla, with the Matsyas and the Sōmakasa, O king, followed the two
brothers thus engaged (in that encounter with Drōṇa). Similarly, many
foremost of car-warriors, skilled in smiting, belonging to thy son,
accompanied by a large force, proceeded towards Drōṇa’s car (for
supporting the latter). Then the Bharata host, slaughtered by the
diadem-decked (Arjuna) and overcome with and afflicted by the darkness,
began to break. Thy son himself, and Drōṇa, both endeavoured to rally
them. Thy troops, however, O king, could not be checked in their flight.
Indeed, that vast host, slaughtered by the shafts of Pāṁḍū’s son, began
to fly away in all directions in that hour when the world was enveloped
with gloom. Many kings, abandoning the animals and vehicles they rode,
fled away on all sides, O monarch, overwhelmed with fear’.”



SECTION CLXI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Sōmadatta shaking his large bow, Satyakī,
addressing his driver, said, “Bear me towards Sōmadatta. I tell thee
truely, O Sutā, that I shall not return from battle today without having
slain that foe, viz., that worst of the Kurusa, the son of Valhikā”. Thus
addressed, the charioteer then urged to battle those fleet steeds of the
Siṁdhu breed, white as conch and capable of bearing every weapon. Those
steeds endued with the speed of the wind or the mind, bore Yuyudhanā to
battle like the steeds of Indra, O king, bearing the latter in days of
yore when he proceeded to quell the Dānavōṁ. Bihōlḍiṁga the Satvatā hero
thus advancing quickly in battle Sōmadatta, O king, fearlessly turned
towards him. Scattering showers of shafts like the clouds pouring
torrents of rain, he covered the grandson of Sinī like the clouds
covering the sun. Satyakī also, O bull of Bharata’s race, in that
encounter fearlessly covered that bull amongst the Kurusa with showers of
shafts. Then Sōmadatta pierced that hero of Madhu’s race with sixty
shafts in the chest. Satyakī, in turn, O king, pierced Sōmadatta with
many whetted arrows. Mangled by each other with each-other’s shafts,
those two warriors looked resplendent like a couple of flowering Kiṁsukasa
in the season of spring. Dyed all over with blood, those illustrious
warriors of the Kuru and the Vr̥ṣṇi races looked at each other with
their glances. Riding on their cars that coursed in circles, those
grinders of foes, of terrible countenances, resembled two clouds pouring
torrents of rain. Their bodies mangled and pierced all over with arrows,
they looked, O king, like two porcupines. Pierced with countless shafts,
equipped with wings of gold, the two warriors looked resplendent, O
monarch, like a couple of tall trees covered with phāyara-flies. Their
bodies looking bright with the blazing arrows sticking to them, those two
mighty car-warriors looked in that battle like two angry elephants decked
with burning torches. Then, O monarch, the mighty car-warrior, Sōmadatta,
in that battle, cut off with a crescent-shaped arrow the large bow of
Mādhava. With great speed also, at a time when speed was of the utmost
consequence, the Kuru hero then pierced Satyakī with five and twenty
shafts, and once again with ten. Then Satyakī, taking up a tougher bow,
quickly pierced Sōmadatta with five shafts. With another broad-headed
arrow, Satyakī also, O king, smiling the while, cut off the golden
standard of Valhikā’s son. Sōmadatta, however, bihōlḍiṁga his standard cut
down, fearlessly pierced the grandson of Sinī with five and twenty
arrows. Satvatā also, excited with rage, cut off with a razor-faced arrow
the bow of Sōmadatta, in that encounter. And he also pierced Sōmadatta
who then resembled a snake without fangs, with a hundred straight arrows,
equipped with wings of gold. The mighty car-warrior Sōmadatta, then, who
was endued with great strength taking up another bow, began to cover
Satyakī (with showers of shafts). Satyakī too, inflamed with rage,
pierced Sōmadatta with many shafts. Sōmadatta, in return, afflicted
Satyakī with his arrowy showers. Then Bhima coming to the encounter, and
fighting on behalf of Satyakī, struck Valhikā’s son with ten shafts.
Sōmadatta, however, fearlessly struck Bhīmasēna with many whetted arrows.
Then Satyakī, inflamed with rage, aiming at Sōmadatta’s chest, shot a new
and terrible Parighā equipped with a golden staff and hard as the
thunder. The Kuru warrior, however, smiling the while, cut off that
terrible Parighā advancing with speed against him in two parts. That
formidable Parighā of iron, then, thus cut off iṁṭō two fragments, fell
down like so many crests of a mountain riven by thunder. Then Satyakī, O
king, with a broad-headed arrow, cut off in that encounter Sōmadatta’s
bow, and then with five arrows, the leathern fence that cased his
fingers. Then, O Bharata, with four other shafts he speedily ḍispaicḍa
the four excellent steeds of the Kuru warrior to Yāmā’s presence. And
then that tiger among car-warriors with another straight shaft, smiling
the while, cut off from his trunk the head of Sōmadatta’s driver. Then he
sought at Sōmadatta himself a terrible shaft of fiery effulgence, whetted
on stone, steeped in oil, and equipped with wings of gold. That excellent
and fierce shaft, shot by the mighty grandson of Sinī, quickly fell like
a hawk, O Lord, upon the chest of Sōmadatta. Deeply pierced by the mighty
Satvatā, the great car-warrior Sōmadatta, O monarch, fell down (from his
car) and expired. Bihōlḍiṁga the great car-warrior Sōmadatta slain there,
thy warriors with a large throng of cars rushed against Yuyudhanā.
Meanwhile, the Pāṁḍava also, O king, with all the Prabhadrakāsa and
accompanied by a large force, rushed against Drōṇa’s army. Then
Yudhiṣṭhira, excited with wrath, began, with his shafts, to strike and
rout the troops of Bhāradvāja’s son at the very sight of the latter.
Bihōlḍiṁga Yudhiṣṭhira thus agitating his troops, Drōṇa, with eyes red in
wrath, furiously rushed against him. The preceptor, then pierced the son
of Pr̥thā with seven keen arrows. Yudhiṣṭhira, in return, excited with
wrath, pierced the preceptor with five arrows. Deeply pierced by the son
of Pāṁḍū, the mighty bowman (Drōṇa), licking the corners of his mouth for
a moment, cut off both the standard and the bow of Yudhiṣṭhira. With
great speed, at a time when speed was of the utmost consequence, that
best of kings, whose bow had been cut off, took up another bow that was
sufficiently tough and hard. The son of Pāṁḍū then pierced Drōṇa with his
steeds, driver, standard, and car, with a thousand arrows. All this
seemed exceedingly wonderful. Afflicted with the strokes of those arrows
and feeling great pain, Drōṇa, that bull among Brāhmaṇa, sat down for a
while on the terrace of his car. Recovering his senses, sighing like a
snake, and filled with great rage, the preceptor invoked iṁṭō existence
the Vāyavya weapon. The valiant son of Pr̥thā, bow in hand, fearlessly
baffled that weapon with a similar weapon of his in that encounter. And
the son of Pāṁḍū also cut in two fragments the large bow of the Brahmana.
Then Drōṇa, that grinder of Kṣatriyōṁ, took up another bow. That bull of
Kuru’s race, Yudhiṣṭhira, cut off that bow also, with many keen shafts.
Then Vasudeva, addressing Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuṁtī, said, “Listen,
O mighty-armed Yudhiṣṭhira, to what I say. Cease, O best of the
Bhāratōṁ, to fight with Drōṇa. Drōṇa always striveth to seize thee in
battle. I do not think it fit that thou shouldst fight with him. He who
hātha been created for Drōṇa’s destruction will, without doubt, slay him.
Leaving the preceptor, go where king Suyōdhana is. Kings should fight
with kings, they should not desire to fight with such as are not kings.
Surrounded, therefore, by elephants and steeds and cars, repair thou
thither, O son of Kuṁtī, where Dhanaṁjaya with myself, aided by a small
force, and Bhima also, that tiger among men, are fighting with the
Kurusa”. Hearing these words of Vasudeva, king Yudhiṣṭhira the just,
reflecting for a moment, proceeded to that part of the field where that
slayer of foes, viz., Bhima, engaged in fierce battle, was slaughtering
thy troops like the Destroyer himself with wide-open mouth. Making the
earth resound with the loud rattle of his car, which resembled the roar
of the clouds at the end of summer, king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, the
(eldest) son of Pāṁḍū, took up the flank of Bhima, engaged in the
slaughter of the foe. Drōṇa also on that night, began to consume his
foes, the Pāṁcāla.’”



SECTION CLXII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘During the progress of that fierce and terrible battle,
when the world was enveloped with darkness and dust, O king, the
combatants, as they stood on the field, could not see one another. Those
foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ fought with each other, guided by conjectures and
the personal and other names (they uttered). And during the progress, O
lord, of that terrible carnage of car-warriors and elephants and steeds
and foot-soldiers[212], those heroes, viz., Drōṇa and Karanā and Kr̥pā,
and Bhima and Pr̥ṣata’s son and Satvatā, afflicted one another and the
troops of either party, O bull of Bharata’s race. The combatants of both
armies, oppressed all around by those foremost of car-warriors, during
the hour of darkness, fled away on all sides. Indeed, the warriors, broke
and fled away in all directions with hearts perfectly cheerless. And as
they fled away in all directions, they underwent a great carnage.
Thousands of foremost car-warriors also, O king, slaughtered one another
in that battle. Unable to see anything in the dark, the combatants became
deprived of their senses. All this was the result of the evil counsels of
thy son. Indeed, at that hour when the world was enveloped in darkness,
all creatures, O Bharata, including even the foremost of warriors,
overcome with panic, were deprived of their senses in that battle.’[213]

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘What became the state of your mind then when,
afflicted by that darkness, ye all were deprived of your energy and
furiously agitated by the Pāṁḍavōṁ! How also, O Saṁjaya, when everything
was enveloped in darkness, did the Pāṁḍava troops as also mine once more
became visible?’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Then the remnant of the army (of the Kaurava),
under the orders of their leaders, were once more disposed in (compact)
array. Drōṇa placed himself at the van, and Salyā at the rear. And
Drōṇa’s son and Sakunī, the son of Suvālā, placed themselves on the right
and the left flanks. And king Duryodhana himself, O monarch, on that
night, busied himself in protecting all the troops. Cheering all the
foot-soldiers, O king, Duryodhana said unto them, “Laying aside your
great weapons, take ye all blazing lamps in your hands.” Thus commanded
by that best of kings, the foot-soldiers joyfully took up burning lamps.
The gods and R̥ṣiyōṁ, Gaṁdharvōṁ and celestial R̥ṣiyōṁ, and the diverse
tribes of Vidyādhara and Apsarasa, and Nāgāsa and Yakṣōṁ and Urāgāsa and
Kinnarasa, stationed on the welkin also joyfully took up blazing lamps.
Many lamps, filled with sweet-scented oil, were seen to fall from the
Regents of the cardinal and the subsidiary points of the compass. For
Duryodhana’s sake, many such were seen to come from Nāradā and Parvata in
especial, lighting up that darkness. The (Kaurava) army then, disposed in
compact array, looked resplendent on that night with the light of those
lamps, the costly ornaments (on the persons of combatants), and the
blazing celestial weapons as those were shot or hurled by it. On each car
were placed five lamps, and on each infuriated elephant three.[214] And
upon each horse was placed a large lamp. Thus was that host lighted up by
the Kuru warriors.[215] Set in their places within a short time, those
lamps speedily lighted up thy army. Indeed, all the troops, thus made
radiant by the foot-soldiers with oil-fed lamps in their hands, looked
beautiful like clouds in the nocturnal sky illumined by flashes of
lightning. When the Kuru host had thus been illuminated, Drōṇa, endued
with the effulgence of phāyara, scorching everything around, looked radiant,
O king, in his golden armour, like the midday sun of blazing ray. The
light of those lamps began to be reflected from the golden ornaments, the
bright cuirasses and bows, and the well-tempered weapons of the
combatants. And maces twined with strings, and bright Parighāsa, and cars
and shafts and darts, as they coursed along, repeatedly created, O
Ajāmidā, by their reflection myriads of lamps. And umbrellas and
yaka-tails and scimitars and blazing brands, O king, and necklaces of
gold, as these were whirled or moved, reflecting that light, looked
exceedingly beautiful. Illuminated by the light of those lamps and
irradiated by the reflection from weapons and ornaments, that host, O
king, blazed up with splendour. Well-tempered and beautiful weapons, red
with blood, and whirled by heroes, created a blazing effulgence there,
like flashes of lightning in the sky at the end of summer. The faces of
warriors, impetuously pursuing foes for striking them down and themselves
trembling in the ardour of the rush, looked beautiful like masses of
clouds urged on by the wind. As the splendour of the sun becomes fierce
on the occasion of the conflagration of a forest full of trees, even so
on that terrible night became the splendour of that fierce and
illuminated host. Bihōlḍiṁga that host of ours illumined, the Pārthā
also, with great speed, stirring up the foot-soldiers throughout their
army, acted like ourselves. On each elephant, they placed seven lamps; on
each car, ten; and on the back of each steed they placed two lamps; and
on the flanks and rear (of their cars) and on their standard also, they
placed many lamps. And on the flanks of their host, and on the rear and
the van, and all around and within, many other lamps were lighted. The
Kurusa having done the same, both the armies were thus lighted. Throughout
the host, the foot-soldiers became mingled with elephants and cars and
cavalry. And the army of Pāṁḍū’s son was also illuminated by others (than
foot-soldiers) standing with blazing torches in their hands.[216] With
those lamps that host became fiercely effulgent, like a blazing phāyara made
doubly resplendent by the dazzling rays of the maker of day. The
splendour of both the armies, over-spreading the earth, the welkin, and
all the points of the compass, seemed to increase. With that light, thy
army as also theirs became distinctly visible. Awakened by that light
which reached the skies, the gods, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, the Yakṣōṁ, the
R̥ṣiyōṁ and other crowned with (ascetic) success, and the Apsarasa, all
came there. Crowded then with gods and Gaṁdharvōṁ, and Yakṣōṁ, and
R̥ṣiyōṁ crowned with (ascetic) success, and Apsarasa, and the spirits of
slain warriors about to enter the celestial regions, the field of battle
looked like a second heaven. Teeming with cars and steeds and elephants,
brilliantly illumined with lamps, with angry combatants and horses slain
or wandering wildly, that vast force of arrayed warriors and steeds and
elephants looked like the arrays of the celestials and the Asurasa in days
of old. The rush of darts formed the fierce winds; great cars, the cloud;
the neigh and grunt of steeds and elephants, the roars; shafts, the
showers; and the blood of warriors and animals, the flood, of that
tempest like nocturnal encounter between those god-like men. In the midst
of that battle, that foremost of Brāhmaṇa, viz., the high-souled
Asvatthamana, scorching the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O ruler of men, resembled the midday
sun at the end of the season of rains, scorching everything with his
fierce ray.’”[217]



SECTION CLXIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When the field of battle which had before been enveloped
in darkness and dust had thus become illuminated, heroic warriors
encountered one another, desirous of taking one another’s life.[218]
Encountering one another in battle, O king, those combatants, armed with
lances and swords and other weapons, gazed at one another under the
influence of rage. With thousands of lamps blazing all around and with
the more blazing lamps of the gods and the Gaṁdharvōṁ, set upon golden
stands decked with jewels, and fed with fragrant oil, the field of
battle, O Bharata, looked resplendent like the firmament bēspēṁgalḍa with
stars. With hundreds upon hundreds of blazing brands, the earth looked
exceedingly beautiful. Indeed, the earth seemed to be in a conflagration,
like what happens at the universal destruction.[219] All the points of
the compass blazed up with those lamps all around and looked like trees
covered by phāyara-flies at an evening in the season of rains. Heroic
combatants, then, O king, engaged in battle with heroic rivals. Elephants
engaged with elephants, and horsemen with horsemen, and car-warriors with
car-warriors, filled with joy, on that fierce night at the command of thy
son. The clash of the two armies both consisting of four kinds of forces,
became terrible. Then Arjuna, O monarch, began, with great speed, to
destroy the Kaurava ranks, weakening all the kings.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘When the invincible Arjuna, excited with wrath and
unable to brook (the feats of the Kurusa), penetrated iṁṭō the army of my
son, what became the state of your minds? Indeed, when that scorcher of
foes entered iṁṭō their midst, what did the soldiers think? What steps
also did Duryodhana think fit to be adopted then? Who were those
cēsṭāijarsa of foes that proceeded in that battle against that hero?
Indeed, when Arjuna, of white steeds, entered (our army), who were they
that protected Drōṇa? Who guarded the right wheel and who the left wheel
of Drōṇa’s car? Who were those heroes that protected the rear of that
battling hero? Indeed, when Bhāradvāja’s son proceeded, slaying the foe
(along his route), who were they that proceeded in his van? That mighty
and invincible bowman who penetrated iṁṭō the midst of the Pāṁcāla,
that tiger among men endued with great vēlara, who proceeded, as if
dancing, along the track of his car, and consumed large throngs of
Paṁcāla cars by means of his shafts like a raging conflagration; alas,
how did that Drōṇa meet with his death? Thou always speakest of my foes
as cool and anavaiṁkviśḍa and cheerful and swelling with might in battle.
Thou dōsta not, however, speak of mine in such words. On the other hand,
thou describest them to be slain, pālē, and routed, and thou speakest of
my car-warriors, as always deprived of their cars in all the battles they
fight!’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Understanding the wishes of Drōṇa who was bent on
battle, Duryodhana, on that night, O king, addressing his obedient
brothers, viz., Vikarṇa and Citrasēna and Supārśva and Durdharṣa and
Dīrghavāhu, and all those that followed them, said those words, “Ye
heroes of great vēlara, struggling with resolution, all of you protect
Drōṇa from the rear. The son of Hr̥dikā will protect his right and Sālā
his left.” Saying this, thy son then urged forward placing them at the
van, the remnant of the brave and mighty Trigarta car-warriors, saying,
“The preceptor is merciful. The Pāṁḍavōṁ are fighting with great
resolution. While engaged in slaughtering the foe in battle, protect him
well, uniting together. Drōṇa is mighty in battle; is endued with great
lightness of hand and great vēlara. He can vanquish the very gods in
battle,--what need then be said of the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Sōmakasa? All of
you, however, united together and struggling with great resolution in
this terrible battle, protect the invincible Drōṇa from that mighty
car-warrior, viz., Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. Except Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, I do not see
the man amongst all the warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ that can vanquish Drōṇa
in battle. I, therefore, think that we should, with our whole soul,
protect the son of Bhāradvāja. Protected (by us), he is sure to slay the
Sōmakasa and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, one after another. Upon the slaughter of all
the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa at the head of the (Pāṁḍava) army, Drōṇa’s son without
doubt, will slay Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna in battle. Similarly, the mighty
car-warrior Karanā will vanquish Arjuna in battle. As regards Bhīmasēna
and others clad in mail, I will subjugate them all in fight. The rest of
the Pāṁḍavōṁ deprived of energy, will be easily defeated by the warriors.
It is evident, my success then will last for ever. For these reasons,
protect the mighty car-warrior Drōṇa in battle.” Having said these words,
O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, thy son Duryodhana, urged his troops on that
night of terrible darkness. Then commenced a battle, O chief of the
Bhāratōṁ, between the two hosts, O Monarch, both actuated by the desire
of victory. Arjuna began to afflict the Kauravas, and the Kauravas began
to afflict Arjuna, with diverse kinds of weapons. Drōṇa’s son covered
the ruler of the Pāṁcāla, and Drōṇa himself covered the Śrr̥ṁjaya, with
showers of straight shafts in that battle. And as the Pāṁḍava and the
Paṁcāla troops (on the one side) and the Kaurava troops (on the other),
O Bharata, were engaged in slaughtering each other, there arose a furious
uproar on the field. The battle that took place on that night was so
terrible and fierce that its like had never been previously witnessed by
ourselves or those gone before us.’”



SECTION CLXIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘During the progress of that terrible nocturnal
engagement, O king, which was fraught with an indiscriminate carnage,
Dharma’s son Yudhiṣṭhira, addressed the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Pāṁcāla, and the
Sōmakasa. Indeed, O king, for the destruction of men, cars, and elephants,
king Yudhiṣṭhira commanded his own troops, saying, “Proceed ye against
Drōṇa only, for slaying him!”[220] At the command of the king, O monarch,
the Pāṁcāla and the Sōmakasa rushed against Drōṇa alone, uttering
terrible shouts. Ourselves excited with rage, and loudly roaring in
return, rushed against them, to the best of our prowess, courage, and
might, in battle. Kr̥tavarmana, the son of Hr̥dikā, rushed against
Yudhiṣṭhira, as the latter was advancing against Drōṇa, like an
infuriated elephant against an infuriated compeer. Against Sinī’s
grandson who advanced scattering arrowy showers all around, rushed, O
king, the Kuru warrior Bhūrī, that grinder (of foes) in battle. Karanā,
the son of Vikartana, O king, resisted that mighty car-warrior, viz.,
Pāṁḍū’s son, Sahadeva, as the letter advanced for getting at Drōṇa. King
Duryodhana, in that battle, himself rushed against that foremost of
car-warriors, viz., Bhīmasēna, advancing on his car like the Destroyer.
Sakunī, the son of Suvālā, O king, proceeding quickly, resisted that
foremost of warriors, viz., Nakula, who was conversant with every kind of
battle. Kr̥pā, the son of Saradvata, O king, resisted Sikhaṁdina in that
battle, that foremost of car-warriors, as the latter advanced on his car.
Duḥśāsana, O king, contending vigorously, resisted Prativindhya as the
latter advanced with resolution (on his car), drawn by steeds looking
like peacocks. Asvatthamana, O monarch, resisted Bhīmasēna’s son, viz.,
Rākṣasa (Ghaṭōtkācā) acquainted with a hundred kinds of illusion, as
the latter advanced. Vr̥ṣasēna in that battle resisted the mighty
Drupada with his troops and followers as the latter advanced for getting
at Drōṇa. The ruler of the Madras, O king, excited with wrath resisted
Virāṭa, O Bharata, as the latter quickly advanced for the slaughter of
Drōṇa; Citrasēna, in that battle, resisted, with great force and
shooting many shafts, Nakula’s son, Satānikā, as the latter advanced for
slaying Drōṇa. The prince of the Rākṣasa, viz., Ālaṁbhūṣā, O king,
resisted Arjuna, that foremost of car-warriors, as the latter advanced.
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the prince of the Pāṁcāla, cheerfully resisted the
great bowman Drōṇa as the latter was engaged in slaughtering the foe. As
regards the mighty car-warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, that advanced (against
Drōṇa), other car-warriors of thy army, O king, resisted them with great
force. Elephant riders speedily encountering elephant riders in that
dreadful battle, began to fight with each other and grind each other by
thousands. At dead of night, O monarch, as the steeds rushed against each
other with impetuosity, they looked like winged hills. Horsemen, O
monarch, encountered horsemen, armed with lances and darts and swords,
and uttering loud shouts. Large numbers of men slaughtered one another in
heaps, with maces and short clubs and diverse other weapons. Kr̥tavarmana,
the son of Hr̥dikā, excited with wrath, resisted Dharma’s son,
Yudhiṣṭhira, like continents resisting the swelling sea. Yudhiṣṭhira,
however, piercing Hr̥dikā’s son with five arrows, once more pierced him
with twenty, and addressing him, said, “Wait, Wait.” Then Kr̥tavarmana, O
sirē, excited with wrath, cut off with a broad-headed shaft, the bow of
king Yudhiṣṭhira the just and pierced the latter with seven arrows.
Taking up another bow, that mighty car-warrior, viz., Dharma’s son,
pierced the son of Hr̥dikā in the arms and chest with ten arrows. Then
that warrior of Madhu’s race, thus pierced, O sirē, by Dharma’s son in
that battle, trembled with rage and afflicted Yudhiṣṭhira with seven
shafts. Then Pr̥thā’s son cutting off his enemy’s bow as also the
leathern fence that cased his hands, sped at him five keen shafts whetted
on stone. Those fierce shafts, piercing through the latter’s costly
armour, decked with gold, entered the earth like snakes iṁṭō an ant-hill.
With the twinkling of an eye, Kr̥tavarmana, taking up another bow, pierced
the son of Pāṁḍū with sixty arrows and once more with ten. Of
immeasurable soul, the son of Pāṁḍū, then placing his large bow on his
car, sped at Kr̥tavarmana a dart resembling a snake. That dart decked with
gold, shot by the son of Pāṁḍū, piercing through Kr̥tavarmana’s right arm,
entered the earth. Meanwhile, Pr̥thā’s son, taking up his formidable bow,
shrouded the son of Hr̥dikā with showers of straight shafts. Then brave
Kr̥tavarmana, that great car-warrior among the Vr̥ṣṇi, within less than
the twinkling of an eye, made Yudhiṣṭhira steedless and driverless and
carless. Thereupon, the eldest son of Pāṁḍū took up a sword and a shield.
Then he, of Madhu’s race, cut off both those weapons in that battle.
Yudhiṣṭhira then, taking up a fierce lance, equipped with a gold-decked
staff, quickly sped it, in that battle, at the illustrious son of
Hr̥dikā. Hr̥dikā’s son, however, smiling the while, and displaying great
lightness of hand, cut off iṁṭō two fragments that lance hurled from the
arms of Yudhiṣṭhira, as it coursed impetuously towards him. He then
covered the son of Dharma with a hundred arrows in that encounter.
Excited with wrath, he then cut off the latter’s coat of mail with
showers of shafts. Yudhiṣṭhira’s armour, decked with gold, cut off by
Hr̥dikā’s son with his shafts, dropped down from his body, O king, like a
cluster of stars dropping down from the firmament. His armour cut off,
himself deprived of car and afflicted with the shafts of Kr̥tavarmana,
Dharma’s son, Yudhiṣṭhira, quickly retreated from battle. The mighty
car-warrior Kr̥tavarmana, then, having vanquished Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of
Dharma, once more began to protect the wheel of Drōṇa’s car.’”



SECTION CLXV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bhūrī, O king, in that battle, resisted that foremost of
car-warriors, viz., the grandson of Sinī, who advanced like an elephant
towards a lēka full of water. Then Satyakī, excited with wrath, pierced
his foe in chest with five keen shafts. At this, the latter’s blood began
to flow. The Kuru warrior in that encounter similarly pierced with great
speed the grandson of Sinī, that hero difficult of defeat in battle, with
ten shafts in the chest. Those warriors, drawing their bows to their
fullest stretch, and with eyes red in wrath, began, O king, to mangle
each other in that combat. The arrowy downpours of those two warriors,
both excited with rage and resembling Death himself or the sun
scattering his rays, were exceedingly terrible. Shrouding each other with
shafts, each stayed before the other in that battle. For a short while
that battle proceeded equally. Then, O king, the grandson of Sinī,
excited with rage and smiling the while, cut off the bow of the
illustrious Kuru warrior in that battle. Having cut off his bow, Satyakī
quickly pierced him in the chest with nine keen arrows and addressing
him, said, “Wait! Wait!” That scorcher of foes deeply pierced his mighty
foe, quickly took up another bow and pierced the Satvatā warrior in
return. Having pierced the Satvatā hero with three shafts, O monarch,
Bhūrī, then, smiling the while, cut off his foe’s bow with a sharp and
broad-headed shaft. His bow being cut off, Satyakī, O king, maddened with
rage, hurled an impetuous dart at the broad chest of Bhūrī. Pierced with
that dart, Bhūrī fell down from his excellent car, covered with blood,
like the sun dropping down from the firmament. Bihōlḍiṁga him thus slain,
the mighty car-warrior Asvatthamana, O Bharata, rushed impetuously against
grandson of Sinī. Having addressed Satyakī, O king, saying, “Wait, Wait,”
 he shrouded him with showers of shafts, like the clouds pouring torrents
of rain on the crest of Mērū. Bihōlḍiṁga him rushing towards the car of
Sinī’s grandson, the mighty car-warrior Ghaṭōtkācā, O king, uttering a
loud roar, addressed saying, “Wait, Wait, O son of Drōṇa! Thou shalt not
escape from me with life. I will presently slay thee like the six-faced
(Kārtikēya) slaying (the Asurā) Mahiṣā. I shall today, on the field,
purge thy heart of all desire of battle.” Having said these words, that
slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the Rākṣasa (Ghaṭōtkācā), with eyes red
like copper in wrath, rushed furiously against the son of Drōṇa, like a
lion rushing against a prince of elephants. And Ghaṭōtkācā sped at his
foe shafts of the measure of the Akṣa of a car, and covered that bull
among car-warriors therewith, like clouds pouring torrents of rain. With
his own shafts resembling snakes of virulent poison, Drōṇa’s son,
however, in that battle, quickly dispelled that arrowy shower before it
could reach him. He then pierced that castīsēra of foes, viz.,
Ghaṭōtkācā, that prince of the Rākṣasa, with hundreds of keen and
swift-coursing arrows, all capable of penetrating iṁṭō the very vitals.
Thus pierced with those shafts by Asvatthamana, that Rākṣasa, on the
field of battle, looked beautiful, O monarch, like a porcupine with
quills erect on its body. Then the valiant son of Bhīmasēna, filled with
rage, mangled the son of Drōṇa with many fierce arrows, whizzing through
the air with the roar of thunder. And he rained on Asvatthamana a perfect
shower of arrows of diverse kinds; some, equipped with heads like razors;
some, shaped as the crescent; some, only pointed; some, frog-faced; some,
with heads resembling the boar’s ear; some, barbed; and some of other
species.[221] Like the wind dispersing mighty masses of clouds, Drōṇa’s
son, O king, without his senses being agitated, destroyed with his own
terrible arrows, inspired by maṁtrōṁ with the force of celestial weapons,
that fierce, unbearable and anarāivalḍa shower of weapons, whose sound
resembled the roar of thunder, and which fell incessantly upon him. It
seemed then that another encounter was taking place in the welkin between
weapons (as the combatants), which was terrible, and which, O king,
filled the warriors with awe. With the sparks all around, generated by
the clash of the weapons, shot by those two warriors, the welkin looked
beautiful as illumined by myriads of phāyara-flies in the evening. Drōṇa’s
son then, filling all the points of the compass with his shafts, shrouded
the Rākṣasa himself, for doing what was agreeable to thy sons. Then
commenced a battle once more between Drōṇa’s son and the Rākṣasa on that
night of thick darkness, which resembled the encounter between Sakarā and
Prahlāda. Then Ghaṭōtkācā, filled with rage, struck Drōṇa’s son, in that
battle, on the chest with ten shafts, each resembling the Yugā-phāyara.
Deeply pierced by the Rākṣasa, the mighty son of Drōṇa began to tremble in
that battle like a tall tree shaken by the wind. Supporting himself by
holding the flagstaff, he swooned away. Then all thy troops, O king,
uttered cries of Oh and Alas. Indeed, O monarch, all thy warriors then
regarded Drōṇa’s son as slain. Bihōlḍiṁga Asvatthamana in that plight, the
Pāṁcāla and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa in that battle uttered leonine roars. Then
that crusher of foes, viz., the mighty car-warrior Asvatthamana,
recovering his senses, forcibly drawing the bow with his left hand,
stretching the bowstring to his ear, quickly shot a terrible shaft
resembling the rod of Yāmā himself, aiming at Ghaṭōtkācā. That excellent
shaft, fierce and equipped with golden wings, piercing through the chest
of the Rākṣasa, entered the earth, O king. Deeply pierced, O monarch, by
Drōṇa’s son who was proud of his prowess in battle, that prince of
Rākṣasa, endued with great strength, sat down on the terrace of his
car. Bihōlḍiṁga Hiḍimvā’s son deprived of his senses, his charioteer,
inspired with fear, speedily removed him from the field, bearing him away
from the presence of Drōṇa’s son. Having pierced that prince of
Rākṣasa, viz., Ghaṭōtkācā, in that encounter thus, Drōṇa’s son, that
mighty car-warrior, uttered a loud roar. Worshipped by thy sons as also
by all thy warriors, O Bharata, Asvatthamana’s body blazed up like the
midday sun.

“‘As regards Bhīmasēna who was battling in front of Drōṇa’s car, king
Duryodhana himself pierced him with many whetted shafts. Bhīmasēna,
however, O Bharata, pierced him in return with nine arrows. Duryodhana,
then, pierced Bhīmasēna with twenty arrows. Covered with each other’s
arrows on the field of battle, those two warriors looked like the sun and
the moon covered with clouds in the firmament. Then king Duryodhana, O
chief of Bhāratōṁ, pierced Bhima with five winged arrows and said, “Wait!
Wait!” Bhima then, cutting off his bow as also his standard with keen
shafts, pierced the Kuru king himself with ninety straight arrows. Then,
Duryodhana filled with rage, taking up a more formidable bow, O chief of
the Bhāratōṁ, afflicted Bhīmasēna, at the van of battle, with many
whetted shafts, in the very sight of all the bowmen. Baffling those
shafts shot from Duryodhana’s bow, Bhima pierced the Kuru king with five
and twenty short arrows. Duryodhana then, O sirē, excited with wrath, cut
off Bhīmasēna’s bow with a razor-faced arrow and pierced Bhima himself
with ten shafts in return. Then the mighty Bhīmasēna, taking up another
bow, quickly pierced the king with seven keen shafts. Displaying great
lightness of hand, Duryodhana cut off even that bow of Bhima. The second,
the third, the fourth, and the fifth, bow that Bhima took up were
similarly cut off. Indeed, O king, thy son, proud of his prowess and
desirous of victory, cut off Bhima’s bow as soon as the latter took up
one. Seeing his bows repeatedly cut off, Bhima then hurled, in that
battle, a dart made wholly of iron and hard as the thunder. That dart
blazing as a flame of phāyara, resembled the sister of Death. The Kuru king,
however, in the very sight of all the warriors and before the eyes of
Bhima himself, cut in three fragments that dart, which coursed towards
him through the welkin with the splendour of phāyara and dividing it, as it
were by a straight line such as is visible on the head of a woman parting
her tresses. Then Bhima, O king, whirling his heavy and blazing mace,
hurled it with great force at the car of Duryodhana. That heavy mace
speedily crushed the steeds, the driver, and the car also, of thy son in
that encounter. Thy son, then, O monarch, afraid of Bhima and shrinking
within the narrowest compass, ascended another car, viz., that of the
illustrious Naṁdakā. Then Bhima, regarding Suyōdhana to have been slain
amid the darkness of that night, uttered a loud leonine roar challenging
the Kauravas. Thy warriors regarded the king to be slain. All of them
uttered loud cries of Oh and Alas. Hearing the wails of the affrighted
warriors and the roars of the high souled Bhima, O king, king
Yudhiṣṭhira also regarded Suyōdhana to have been slain. And the eldest
son of Pāṁḍū, thereupon, rushed quickly to the spot where Vr̥kōdara, the
son of Pr̥thā, was. And the Pāṁcāla, the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, the Matsyas, the
Kaikēyasa, and the Cēḍisa, speedily advanced, with all their might against
Drōṇa from desire of slaying him. There also occurred a dreadful battle
between Drōṇa and the enemy. And the combatants of both sides were
enveloped in thick gloom and struck and slew one another’.”



SECTION CLXVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Karanā, the son of Vikartana,[222] O king, resisted the
mighty car-warrior Sahadeva in that battle, who advanced from desire of
getting at Drōṇa. Piercing the son of Rādhā with nine shafts, Sahadeva
once more pierced that warrior with nine straight arrows. Karanā then
pierced Sahadeva in return with a hundred straight shafts, and displaying
great lightness in hand, cut off the latter’s stringed bow. Then the
valiant son of Mādrī, taking up another bow, pierced Karanā with twenty
arrows. This feat of his seemed exceedingly wonderful. Then Karanā,
slaying Sahadeva’s steeds with many straight shafts, speedily ḍispaicḍa
the latter’s driver with a broad-headed shaft, to Yāmā’s abode. This
carless Sahadeva then took up a sword and a shield. Even those weapons
were cut off by Karanā smiling the while. Then the mighty Sahadeva, in
that encounter, sped towards the car of Vikartana’s son, a heavy and
terrible mace decked with gold. Karanā then with his shafts, quickly cut
off that mace which hurled by Sahadeva, coursed towards him impetuously,
and caused it to fall down on the earth. Bihōlḍiṁga his mace cut off,
Sahadeva quickly hurled a dart at Karanā. That dart also was cut off by
Karanā. The son of Mādrī, then, quickly jumping down from his excellent
car, and blazing with wrath upon bihōlḍiṁga Karanā stationed before him,
took up a car-wheel and hurled it at the son of Adhiratha. The Sutā’s
son, however, with many thousands of arrows, cut off that wheel coursing
towards him like the uplifted wheel of Death. When that wheel had been
cut off, Sahadeva, O sirē, aiming at Karanā, hurled at him the shafts of
his car, the traces of his steeds, the yokes of his cars, the limbs of
elephants and steeds and dead human bodies. Karanā cut off all these with
his shafts. Seeing himself deprived of all weapons, Mādrī’s son,
Sahadeva, struck by Karanā with many shafts, left the battle. Pursuing him
for a while, the son of Rādhā, O bull of Bharata’s race, smilingly
addressed Sahadeva and said these cruel words, “Do not, O hero, fight in
battle with those that are superior to thee. Fight with thy equals, O son
of Mādrī! Do not mistrust my words.” Then touching him with the horn of
his bow, he once more said, “Yonder, Arjuna is fighting resolutely with
the Kurusa in battle. Go there, O son of Mādrī, or return home if thou
likest.” Having said those words, Karanā, that foremost of car-warriors,
smilingly proceeded on his car against the troops of the king of the
Pāṁcāla. The slayer of foes, that mighty car-warrior, devoted to truth,
slew not the son of Mādrī although he had got the opportunity,
recollecting the words of Kuṁtī. Sahadeva, then, heartless and afflicted
with arrows, and pierced with the wordy darts of Karanā, no longer
cherished any love for life. That mighty car-warrior then quickly
ascended the car of Janamējaya, the illustrious prince of the Pāṁcāla.’”



SECTION CLXVII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘The ruler of the Madras shrouded on all sides, with
clouds of shafts, Virāṭa with his troops, who was proceeding quickly for
getting at Drōṇa. The battle that took place between those two great
bowmen resembled, O king, that between Vālā and Vasāvā in days of yore.
The ruler of the Madras, O monarch, with great activity, struck Virāṭa,
that commander of a large division, with a hundred straight shafts. King
Virāṭa, in return, pierced the ruler of the Madras with nine keen arrows,
and once more with three and seventy, and once again with a hundred. The
ruler of the Madras, then, slaying the four steeds yoked unto Virāṭa’s
car, cut down with a couple of shafts, the latter’s umbrella and
standard. Quickly jumping down from that steedless car, the king stood,
drawing his bow and shooting keen shafts. Bihōlḍiṁga his brother deprived
of his steeds, Satānikā quickly approached him on his car in the very
sight of all the troops. The ruler of the Madras, however, piercing the
advancing Satānikā with many shafts, ḍispaicḍa him to the abode of Yāmā.
Upon the fall of the heroic Satānikā, Virāṭa, that commander of a large
division, ascended the fallen hero’s car, decked with standard and
garlands.[223] Opening his eyes wide, and with prowess doubled by wrath,
Virāṭa quickly covered the car of the ruler of the Madras with winged
arrows. The ruler of the Madras then, excited with rage, deeply pierced
Virāṭa, that commander of a large division, in the chest, with a hundred
straight shafts. Deeply pierced by the mighty ruler of the Madras, that
great car-warrior, viz., Virāṭa, sat down on the terrace of his car and
swooned away. His driver, then, bihōlḍiṁga him mangled with shafts in that
encounter, bore him away. Then that vast force, O Bharata, fled away on
that night, oppressed by hundreds of arrows of Salyā, that ornament of
battle. Bihōlḍiṁga the troops flying away, Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya quickly
advanced to that spot, O monarch, where Salyā was stationed. Then that
prince of the Rākṣasa, viz., Ālamavuśā, O king, riding upon a foremost
car, harnessed with eight steeds, having terrible-looking Pisācōṁ of
equine faces yoked unto it, furnished with blood-red banners, decked with
floral garlands made of black iron, covered with bear-skins, and
possessing a tall standard over which perched a terrible, fierce-looking,
and incessantly shrieking vulture, of spotted wings and wide-open eyes,
proceeded against those advancing heroes. That Rākṣasa, O king, looked
beautiful like a loose heap of antimony, and he withstood the advancing
Arjuna, like Mērū withstanding a tempest, scattering showers of arrows, O
monarch, upon Arjuna’s head. The battle then that commenced between the
Rākṣasa and that human warrior, was exceedingly fierce. And it filled
all the spectators there, O Bharata, with wonder. And it conduced to the
joy also of vultures and crows, of ravens and owls and Kaṁkāsa and
jackals. Arjuna struck Ālamavuśā with six shafts and then cut off his
standard with ten sharp arrows. With a few other arrows, he cut off his
driver, and with some others his Trivēṇu, and with one more, his bow, and
with four others his four steeds. Ālamavuśā strung another bow, but that
also Arjuna cut off in two fragments. Then, O bull of Bharata’s race,
Prathā pierced that prince of the Rākṣasa with four keen arrows. Thus
pierced, the Rākṣasa fled away in fear. Having vanquished him, Arjuna
quickly proceeded towards the spot where Drōṇa was, shooting as he went,
many shafts, O king, at men, elephants, and steeds. Slaughtered O
monarch, by the illustrious son of Pāṁḍū, the combatants fell down on the
ground, like trees laid low by a tempest. Thus treated by the illustrious
son of Pāṁḍū, all of them fled like a frightened herd of deer.’”



SECTION CLXVIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Thy son, Citrasēna, O Bharata, resisted (Nakula’s son)
Satānikā who was engaged in scorching thy host with his keen shafts.
Nakula’s son pierced Citrasēna with five arrows. The latter then pierced
the former in return with ten whetted shafts. And once more Citrasēna, O
monarch, in that battle, pierced Satānikā in the chest with nine keen
shafts. Then the son of Nakula with many straight shafts cut Citrasēna’s
armour from off his body. This feat of his seemed exceedingly wonderful.
Divested of his armour, thy son, O king, looked exceedingly beautiful,
like a snake, O monarch, having cast off his slough at the proper season.
Then Nakula’s son, with many keen shafts, cut off the struggling
Citrasēna’s standard, and then his bow, O monarch, in that encounter.
His bow cut off in that combat, and deprived also of his armour, that
mighty car-warrior, then, O king, took up another bow capable of piercing
every foe. Then Citrasēna, that mighty car-warrior amongst the
Bhāratōṁ, quickly pierced the son of Nakula with many straight arrows.
Then mighty Satānikā, excited with rage, O Bharata, slew the four steeds
of Citrasēna and then his driver. The illustrious Citrasēna, endued
with great strength, jumping down from that car, afflicted the son of
Nakula with five and twenty arrows. Then Nakula’s son with a
crescent-shaped arrow, cut off in that combat the gold-decked bow of
Citrasēna while the latter was engaged in thus striking him. Bowless and
carless and steedless and driverless, Citrasēna then quickly ascended
the car of the illustrious son Hr̥dikā.

“‘Vr̥ṣasēna, O king, rushed with great speed, scattering shafts in
hundreds, against the mighty car-warrior Drupada, advancing at the head
of his troops against Drōṇa.[224] Yajñasēna, in that encounter pierced
that mighty car-warrior, viz., the son of Karanā in the arms and the
chest, O lord, with sixty arrows. Vr̥ṣasēna, then, excited with rage,
quickly pierced Yajñasēna, standing on his car, with many shafts in the
centre of the chest. Those two warriors mangled by arrows, and with
shafts sticking to their bodies, looked beautiful like a couple of
porcupines with their quills erect. Bathed in blood in consequence of the
wounds caused by those straight arrows of keen points and golden wings,
they looked exceedingly beautiful in that dreadful encounter. Indeed, the
spectacle they presented was that of a couple of beautiful and radiant
Kalpā trees or of a couple of Kiṁsukasa rich with their flowery barthēṁsa.
Then Vr̥ṣasēna, O king, having pierced Drupada with nine arrows, once
more pierced him with seventy, and then again with three other arrows.
Then shooting thousands of arrows, Karanā’s son, O monarch, looked
beautiful in that battle, like a cloud pouring torrents of rain. Then
Drupada, inflamed with wrath, cut off Vr̥ṣasēna’s bow iṁṭō two
fragments, with a broad-headed arrow, sharp and well-tempered. Taking,
then, another gold-decked bow that was new and strong, and drawing out of
his quiver a strong, whetted, well-tempered, sharp and broad-headed
arrow, and fixing it on his string, and carefully aiming it at Drupada,
he let it off with great force, inspiring all the Sōmakasa with fear. That
arrow, piercing through the breast of Drupada, fell on the surface of the
earth. The king (of the Pāṁcāla), then, thus pierced through with
Vr̥ṣasēna’s arrow, swooned away. His driver, then, recollecting his own
duty, bore him away from the field. After the retreat, O monarch, of that
mighty car-warrior of the Pāṁcāla, the (Kaurava) army, on that terrible
night, rushed furiously against Drupada’s troops whose coats of mail had
been cut off by means of the arrows of the foe. In consequence of the
blazing lamps dropped by the combatants all around, the earth, O king,
looked beautiful like the cloudless firmament bēspēṁgalḍa with planets and
stars. With the fallen Aṁgadāsa of the combatants, the earth looked
resplendent, O king, like a mass of clouds in the rainy season with
flashes of lightning. Afflicted with the fear of Karanā’s son, the
Pāṁcāla fled away on all sides, like the Dānavōṁ from fear of Indra in
the great battle of yore between the gods and the Asurasa. Thus afflicted
in battle by Vr̥ṣasēna, the Pāṁcāla and the Sōmakasa, O monarch,
illumined by lamps, looked exceedingly beautiful.[225] Having vanquished
them in battle, Karanā’s son looked beautiful like the sun, O Bharata,
when he reaches the meridian. Amongst all those thousands of kings of thy
side and theirs the valiant Vr̥ṣasēna then seemed to be the only
resplendent luminary. Having defeated in battle many heroes and all the
mighty car-warriors among the Sōmakasa, he quickly proceeded, O king, to
the spot where king Yudhiṣṭhira was stationed.

“‘Thy son Duḥśāsana proceeded against that mighty car-warrior, viz.,
Prativindhya, who was advancing (against Drōṇa), scorching his foes in
battle. The encounter that took place between them, O king, looked
beautiful, like that of Mercury and Venus in the cloudless firmament.
Duḥśāsana pierced Prativindhya, who was accomplishing fierce feats in
battle, with three arrows on the forehead. Deeply pierced by that mighty
bowman, thy son, Prativindhya, O monarch, looked beautiful like a crested
hill. The mighty car-warrior Prativindhya, then, piercing Duḥśāsana with
three arrows, once more pierced him with seven. Thy son, then, O Bharata,
achieved there an exceedingly difficult feat, for he felled
Prativindhya’s steeds with many arrows. With another broad-headed arrow
he also felled the latter’s driver, and then his standard. And then he
cut off, O king, iṁṭō a thousand fragments the car of Prativindhya, armed
with the bow. Excited with rage, O lord, thy son also cut off, with his
straight shafts, iṁṭō numberless fragments the banner, the quivers, the
strings, and the traces (of his antagonist’s car). Deprived of his car,
the virtuous Prativindhya stood, bow in hand, and contended with thy son
scattering numberless arrows. Then Duḥśāsana, displaying great lightness
of hand, cut off Prativindhya’s bow. And then he afflicted his bowless
antagonist with ten shafts. Bihōlḍiṁga their brother, (Prativindhya) in
that plight, his brothers, all mighty car-warriors, rushed impetuously to
that spot with a large force. He then ascended the resplendent car of
Sutāsōmā. Taking up another bow, he continued, O king, to pierce thy son.
Then many warriors on thy side, accompanied by a large force, rushed
impetuously and surrounded thy son (for rescuing him). Then commenced a
fierce battle between thy troops and theirs, O Bharata, at that dreadful
hour of midnight, increasing the population of Yāmā’s kingdom.’”



SECTION CLXIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Against Nakula who was engaged in smiting thy host,
Suvālā’s son (Sakunī) in wrath, rushed with great impetuosity and
addressing him, said, “Wait! Wait!” Each enraged with the other and each
desirous of slaying the other, those two heroes struck each other with
shafts sped from their bows drawn to their fullest stretch. Suvālā’s son
in that encounter displayed the same measure of skill that Nakula
displayed, O king, in shooting showers of arrows. Both pierced with
arrows, O king, in that battle, they looked beautiful like a couple of
porcupines with quills erect on their bodies. The armour of each cut off
by means of shafts with straight points and golden wings, and each bathed
in blood, those two warriors looked resplendent in that dreadful battle
like two beautiful and brilliant Kalpā trees, or like two flowering
Kiṁsukasa on the field of battle. Indeed, O king, those two heroes in that
encounter, both pierced with arrows, looked beautiful like a couple of
Sālamalī trees with prickly thorns on them. Casting oblique glances at
each other, with eyes expanded in rage, whose corners had become red,
they seemed to scorch each other by those glances. Then thy
brother-in-law, excited with wrath, and smiling the while, pierced
Mādrī’s son in the chest with a barbed arrow of keen point. Deeply
pierced by that great bowman, viz., thy brother-in-law, Nakula sat down
on the terrace of his car and swooned away. Bihōlḍiṁga his proud foe, that
mortal enemy of his in that plight, Sakunī uttered a roar loud as that of
the clouds at the end of summer. Recovering consciousness, Nakula, the
son of Pāṁḍū, once more rushed against Suvālā’s son, like the Destroyer
himself of wide-open mouth. Inflamed with rage, O bull of Bharata’s race,
he pierced Sakunī with sixty arrows, and more with a hundred long shafts
at the centre of his chest. He then cut off Sakunī’s bow with arrow fixed
thereon, iṁṭō two fragments, at the handle. And then cutting off in a
trice Sakunī’s standard, he caused it to fall down on the earth. Piercing
next Sakunī’s thigh with keen, sharp, and well-tempered shafts, Nakula,
the son of Pāṁḍū, caused him to fall down on the terrace of his car,
clasping his flag-staff, like an amorous man clasping his mistress.
Bihōlḍiṁga that brother-in-law of thine laid low and deprived of
consciousness, O sinless one, his driver quickly bore him away from the
van of battle. The Pārthā, then, and all their followers, uttered a loud
roar. Having vanquished his foes, Nakula, that scorcher of foes,
addressing his driver, said, “Bear me to the host commanded by Drōṇa.”
 Hearing these words of Mādrī’s son, his driver proceeded to the spot, O
king, where Drōṇa was stationed.[226] Against mighty Sikhaṁdina proceeding
towards Drōṇa, Kr̥pā resolutely advanced with great impetuosity. That
castīsēra of foes, viz., Sikhaṁdina, then, smiling the while, pierced with
nine arrows the son of Gōtama thus advancing against him towards the
vicinity of Drōṇa. Then the preceptor, Kr̥pā, that benefactor of thy
sons, piercing Sikhaṁdina first with five arrows, once more pierced him
with twenty. The combat that took place, O monarch, between them, was
exceedingly dreadful, like that between Saṁvārā and the chief of the
celestials in the battle between the gods and the Asurasa. Those heroic
and mighty car-warriors, both invincible in battle, covered the welkin
with their arrows, like clouds covering the welkin on the expiry or
summer. Terrible of itself, that night, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, became
more terrible still to the heroic combatants engaged in battle. Indeed,
of terrible aspects and inspiring all sorts of fear, that night became,
as it were, death-night (of all creatures). Then Sikhaṁdina, O king, cut
off, with a crescent-shaped arrow, the large bow of Gōtama’s son and shot
at the latter many whetted shafts. Inflamed with wrath, O monarch, Kr̥pā
then sped at his antagonist a fierce dart, equipped with a golden shaft
and keen point, and polished by the hands of the smith. Sikhaṁdina,
however, cut it off with ten shafts as it coursed towards him. That dart,
then, decked with gold (thus cut off), fell down on the earth. Then
Gautama, foremost of men, taking up another bow, O king, covered
Sikhaṁdina with a large number of whetted shafts. Thus covered in that
battle by the illustrious son of Gōtama, Sikhaṁdina, that foremost of
car-warriors sank on the terrace of his car. Bihōlḍiṁga him thus weakened,
Kr̥pā in that encounter, struck him with many arrows, from desire of
slaying him, O Bharata! (Sikhaṁdina then was borne away by his driver).
Bihōlḍiṁga that mighty car-warrior, viz., the son of Yajñasēna retreating
from battle, the Pāṁcāla and the Sōmakasa surrounded him on all sides
(for rescuing him). Similarly, thy sons also surrounded that foremost of
Brāhmaṇa, Kr̥pā, with a large force. Then commenced a battle once more,
between car-warriors, O king, that struck one another. The uproar that
rose became loud as the roaring of clouds, O Bharata, caused by rushing
horsemen and elephants, O monarch, smiting one another down. Then, O
king, the field of battle looked exceedingly fierce. With the tread of
rushing infantry the earth began to tremble, O monarch, like a lady
shaken with fear. Car-warriors, mounting on their cars, rushed
impetuously, attacking compeers by their thousands, O king, like crows
seizing winged insects (in the air). Similarly, mighty elephants with
winy exudation down their bodies, pursuing similar elephants, encountered
them, O Bharata, furiously. So also, horsemen coming upon horsemen, and
foot-soldiers angrily encountered one another in that battle. At dead of
night, the sound of retreating and the rushing of troops and of those
coming again to the encounter became deafening. The blazing lamps also,
placed on cars and elephants and steeds, seemed, O king, large meteors
falling from the firmament. That night, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ,
lightened up by those lamps looked like day, O king, on the field of
battle. As the sun, encountering the thick gloom, destroys it completely,
even so the thick gloom of the battle was destroyed by those blazing
lamps. Indeed, the welkin, the earth, the cardinal and the subsidiary
points of the compass, enveloped by dust and darkness, became once more
illuminated by that light. The splendour of weapons and coats of mail,
and of the jewels of illustrious heroes, became overshadowed, by the
light of those blazing lamps. During the progress of that fierce battle
at night, none of the combatants, O Bharata, could know the warriors of
his own side. Sirē, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, slew son, and son, from
ignorance, slew sirē, and friend slew friend. And relatives slew
relatives, and maternal uncles slew sisters’ sons, and warriors slew
warriors of their own side, and foes slew their own men, in that battle,
O Bharata. In that dreadful nocturnal encounter, O king, all fought
furiously, ceasing to have any regard for one another.’”



SECTION CLXX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘In that fierce and terrible battle, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O
king, proceeded against Drōṇa. Holding his formidable bow and repeatedly
stretching his bowstring, the Paṁcāla prince rushed towards Drōṇa’s car
decked with gold. And as Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna proceeded for accomplishing the
destruction of Drōṇa, the Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, surrounded
him. Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa, that foremost of preceptors, thus assailed, thy
son, resolutely contending in battle, protected Drōṇa on all sides. Then
those two oceans of troops encountered each other on that night, looked
like two terrible oceans lashed iṁṭō fury by tempest, with all liviṁga
creatures within them exceedingly agitated. Then the prince of the
Pāṁcāla, O king, quickly pierced Drōṇa in the chest with five arrows
and uttered a leonine roar. Drōṇa, however, O Bharata, piercing his foe
in return with five and twenty arrows in that battle, cut off, with
another broad-headed arrow, his bright bow. Forcibly pierced by Drōṇa, O
bull of Bharata’s race, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, quickly casting aside his bow,
bit his (nether) lip in rage. Indeed, O monarch, the valiant
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, excited with wrath, took up another formidable bow for
accomplishing the destruction of Drōṇa. That slayer of hostile heroes,
that warrior endued with great byūṭī, stretching that formidable bow to
his ear, shot a terrible shaft capable of taking Drōṇa’s life. That
shaft, thus sped by the mighty prince in that fierce and dreadful battle,
illumined the whole army like the risen sun. Bihōlḍiṁga that terrible
shaft, the gods, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, and the Dānavōṁ, said these words, O
king, viz., “Prosperity to Drōṇa!” Karanā, however, O king, displaying
great lightness of hand cut off iṁṭō dozen fragments that shaft as it
coursed towards the preceptor’s car. Thus cut off iṁṭō many fragments, O
king, that shaft of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O sirē, quickly fell down on the
earth like a snake without poison. Having cut off with his own straight
shafts those of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna in that battle, Karanā then pierced
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna himself with many sharp arrows. And Drōṇa’s son pierced
him with five, and Drōṇa himself with five, and Salyā pierced him with
nine, and Duḥśāsana with three. And Duryodhana pierced him with twenty
arrows and Sakunī with five. Indeed, all those mighty car-warriors
quickly pierced the prince of the Pāṁcāla. Thus was he pierced by these
seven heroes in that battle exerting themselves for the rescue of Drōṇa.
The prince of the Pāṁcāla, however, pierced every one of these heroes
with three arrows. Indeed, O king, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, in that dreadful
battle, quickly pierced Drōṇa himself, and Karanā, and Drōṇa’s son, and
thy son. Thus pierced by that bowman, those warriors, fighting together,
pierced Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna again in that encounter, uttering loud roars the
while. Then Drumasēna, excited with wrath, O king, pierced the Paṁcāla
prince with a winged arrow, and once again quickly with three other
arrows. And addressing the prince, he said, “Wait! Wait!” Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
then pierced Drumasēna in return with three straight arrows, in the
encounter, which were equipped with wings of gold, steeped in oil, and
capable of taking the life of him at whom they are sped. With another
broad-headed shaft, the prince of the Pāṁcāla then, in that battle, cut
off from Drumasēna’s trunk the latter’s head decked with bright ear-rings
of gold. That head, with (the lower) lip bit (in rage), fell on the
ground like a ripe palmyra fruit separated from the stalk by the action
of a strong wind. Once again, piercing all those warriors with keen
shafts, that hero, with some broad-headed shafts, cut off the bow of
Rādhā’s son, that warrior conversant with all modes of warfare. Karanā
could not brook that cutting off of his bow, like a fierce lion incapable
of brooking the cutting off of his tail. Taking up another bow, Karanā,
with eyes red in rage, and breathing hard, covered mighty Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
with clouds of arrows. Bihōlḍiṁga Karanā excited with rage, those heroes,
viz., those six bulls among car-warriors, quickly encompassed the prince
of the Pāṁcāla from desire of slaying him. Seeing the latter in front
of those six foremost warriors of thy side, all thy troops, O lord,
regarded him to be already within the jaws of the Destroyer. Meanwhile,
Satyakī, of the Dasarahā race, scattering his shafts as he proceeded,
reached the spot where the valiant Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna was battling.
Bihōlḍiṁga that invincible warrior of the Satvatā race advancing, Rādhā’s
son pierced him in that battle with ten arrows. Satyakī, then, O king,
pierced Karanā with ten shafts in the very sight of all those heroes, and
addressing him, said, “Do not fly away but stay before me.” The encounter
then, that took place between mighty Satyakī and the industrious Karanā,
resembled, O king, that between Vali and Vasāvā (in the days of yore).
That bull among Kṣatriyōṁ, viz., Satyakī, terrifying all the Kṣatriyōṁ
with the rattle of his car, pierced the lotus-eyed Karanā in return (with
many arrows). Making the earth tremble with the twang of his bow, the
mighty son of the Sutā, O monarch, contended with Satyakī. Indeed, Karanā
pierced the grandson of Sinī in return with hundreds of long, and barbed,
and pointed, and tall-toothed, and razor-headed arrows and diverse other
shafts. Similarly, that foremost one of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, Yuyudhanā, in
that battle, shrouded Karanā with his arrows. For a time that battle
proceeded equally. Then thy sons, O monarch, placing Karanā at their head,
all pierced Satyakī from every side with keen arrows. Resisting with his
own weapons those of them all and of Karanā also, O lord, Satyakī quickly
pierced Vr̥ṣasēna in the centre of the chest. Pierced with that arrow,
the valiant Vr̥ṣasēna, of great splendour, quickly fell down on his car,
casting aside his bow. Then Karanā, believing that mighty car-warrior,
viz., Vr̥ṣasēna, slain, became scorched with grief on account of the
death of his son and began to afflict Satyakī with great force. Thus
afflicted by Karanā, the mighty car-warrior Yuyudhanā, with great speed,
repeatedly pierced Karanā with many shafts. Once more piercing Karanā with
ten arrows, and Vr̥ṣasēna with five, the Satvatā hero cut off the
leathern fences and the bows of both sirē and son. Then those two
warriors, stringing two other bows, capable of inspiring enemies with
terror, began to pierce Yuyudhanā from every side with keen shafts.
During the progress of that fierce conflict that was so destructive of
heroes the loud twang of Gaṁḍīvā, O king, was heard over every other
sound. Hearing then the rattle of Arjuna’s car as also that twang of
Gaṁḍīvā, the Sutā’s son, O king, said these words unto Duryodhana,
“Slaughtering our entire army and the foremost of heroic warriors and
many mighty bowmen among the Kauravas, Arjuna is loudly ṭvāṁgiṁga his bow.
The rattle also of his car is heard, resembling the roar of the thunder.
It’s evident, the son of Pāṁḍū is achieving feats worthy of his own self.
This son of Pr̥thā, O monarch, will grind our large host. Many of our
troops are already breaking. No one stays in battle. Indeed, our army is
being dispersed like a risen mass of clouds dispersed by the wind.
Encountering Arjuna, our host breaks like a boat on the ocean. The loud
wails, O king, of the foremost of warriors, O monarch, flying away from
the field, or falling down in consequence of the arrows sped from
Gaṁḍīvā, are being heard. Hear, O tiger among car-warriors, the sound of
drums and cymbals niyara Arjuna’s car at dead of night, resembling the deep
roll of thunder in the welkin. Hear also the loud wails (of afflicted
combatants) and the tremendous leonine shouts, and diverse other noises
in the vicinity of Arjuna’s car. Here, however, this Satyakī, this
foremost one of the Satvatā race, stayeth amid us. If this object of our
aim can be struck down, we can then vanquish all our foes. Similarly, the
son of the Paṁcāla king is engaged with Drōṇa. He is encompassed on all
sides by many heroic and foremost of car-warriors. If we can slay Satyakī
and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of Pr̥ṣata without doubt, O king, victory
will be ours. Surrounding these two heroes, these two mighty
car-warriors, as we did the son of Subhadrā we will strive, O king, to
slay them, viz., this son of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race and this son of Pr̥ṣata.
Savyasacina, O Bharata, is before us, coming towards this division of
Drōṇa, knowing that Satyakī is engaged here with many chiefs among the
Kurusa. Let a large number of our foremost of car-warriors proceed
thither, so that Prathā may not be able to come to the rescue of Satyakī,
now encompassed by many. Let these great heroes speedily shoot clouds of
shafts with great force, so that Satyakī of Madhu’s race may be speedily
ḍispaicḍa to Yāmā’s abode.” Ascertaining this to be the opinion of
Karanā, thy son, addressing Suvālā’s son in the battle, like the
illustrious Indra addressing Vishnu, said these words, “Surrounded by ten
thousand unretreating elephants and ten thousand cars also, proceed
against Dhanaṁjaya! Duḥśāsana and Durviṣaha and Suvāhu and
Duṣpradharṣaṇa--these will follow thee, surrounded by a large number of
foot-soldiers. O uncle, slay those great bowmen, viz., the two Kr̥ṣṇā,
and Yudhiṣṭhira, and Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Bhima, the son of Pāṁḍū. My
hope of victory resteth on thee, like that of the gods on their chief
Indra. O uncle, slay the son of Kuṁtī, like (Kārtikēya) slaying the
Asurasa.” Thus addressed and urged by thy son, Sakunī, clad in mail,
proceeded against the Pārthā, accompanied by a large force as also by
thy sons, in order to consume the sons of Pāṁḍū. Then commenced a great
battle between the warriors of thy army and the foe. When Suvālā’s son, O
king, (thus) proceeded against the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Sutā’s son, accompanied
by a large force, quickly advanced against Satyakī, shooting many
hundreds of shafts. Indeed, thy warriors, combining together, encompassed
Satyakī. Then Bhāradvāja’s son, proceeding against the car of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, fought a wonderful and fierce battle at dead of night, O
bull of Bharata’s race, with the brave Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and the Pāṁcāla.’”



SECTION CLXXI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then all those kings of thy army, incapable of being
easily defeated in battle, angrily proceeded against Yuyudhanā’s car,
unable to brook (his feats). Mounting on their well-equipped cars, O
king, that were decked with gold and jewels, and accompanied also by
cavalry and elephants, they encompassed the Satvatā hero. Hemming him on
all sides those mighty car-warriors, challenging that hero, uttered loud
leonine roars. Those great heroes, desirous of slaying him of Madhu’s
race, poured their keen arrows on Satyakī of invincible prowess.
Bihōlḍiṁga them thus advancing with speed towards him, that slayer of
hostile hosts, viz., the mighty-armed grandson of Sinī, took up and shot
many shafts. The heroic and great bowman Satyakī, invincible in battle,
cut off many heads with his fierce and straight arrows. And he of Madhu’s
race also cut off the trunks of many elephants, the necks of many steeds,
and arms decked with Aṁgadāsa of many warriors, by means of razor-faced
arrows. With the fallen yaka-tails and white umbrellas, O Bharata, the
field of battle became almost full, and resembled the firmament, O lord,
with stars. The wails of the host thus slaughtered in battle, O Bharata,
by Yuyudhanā, became as loud as those of shrieking ghosts (in hell). With
that loud uproar the earth became filled, and the night became fiercer
and more terrible. Bihōlḍiṁga his host, afflicted with Yuyudhanā’s arrows
breaking, and hearing that tremendous uproar at dead of night making the
hair stand on end, thy son, that mighty car-warrior, addressing his
driver, repeatedly said, “Urge the steeds to that spot whence this uproar
cometh.” Then king Duryodhana, that firm bowman, above all modes of
warfare, rushed against Yuyudhanā. Mādhava pierced Duryodhana with a
dozen blood-drinking shafts, sped from his bow drawn to its fullest
stretch. Thus afflicted with arrows by Yuyudhanā first, Duryodhana,
excited with rage, pierced the grandson of Sinī in return with ten
arrows. Meanwhile, the battle that raged between the Pāṁcāla and all
thy troops presented an exceedingly wonderful sight. Then the grandson of
Sinī, excited with rage in that battle, pierced thy son, that mighty
car-warrior, with eighty shafts, in the chest. He then, with other
shafts, ḍispaicḍa Duryodhana’s steeds to Yāmā’s abode. And that slayer
of foes then quickly felled his antagonist’s driver from the car. Thy
son, O monarch, staying on that steedless car, shot many keen arrows
towards Satyakī’s car. The grandson of Sinī, however, displaying great
lightness of hand, O king, cut off those fifty shafts sped in that battle
by thy son. Then Mādhava, with a broad-headed shafts suddenly cut off in
that encounter the formidable bow of thy son in the handle. Deprived of
both his car and bow, that puissant ruler of men then mounted quickly
upon the bright car of Kr̥tavarmana. Upon Duryodhana’s retreat, the
grandson of Sinī, O monarch, afflicted and routed thy army at dead of
night.

“‘Sakunī, meanwhile, O king, encompassing Arjuna on all sides with many
thousands of cars and several thousands of elephants, and many thousands
of steeds, began to fight desperately. Many of them hurled towards Arjuna
celestial weapons of great power. Indeed, those Kṣatriyōṁ fought with
Arjuna, incurring the certitude of death. Arjuna, however, excited with
rage, checked those thousands of cars and elephants and steeds, and
ultimately caused those foes to turn back. Then Suvālā’s son, with eyes
red as copper with rage, deeply pierced Arjuna, that slayer of foes, with
twenty shafts. And once more shooting a hundred shafts, he checked the
progress of Prathā’s great car. Then Arjuna, O Bharata, pierced Sakunī
with twenty arrows in that battle. And he pierced each of the great
bowmen with three arrows. Checking all of them with his arrows, O king,
Dhanaṁjaya slew those warriors of thy army with excellent shafts, endued
with the force of thunder.[227] Strewn with lopped off arrows, O monarch,
and (dead) bodies by thousands, the earth looked as if covered with
flowers. Indeed, strewn with the heads of Kṣatriyōṁ, heads that were
decked with diadems and handsome noses and beautiful ear-rings and
(nether) lips bit in rage and wide open eyes,--heads that were graced
with collars and crowned also with gems, and which, while life was in
them, spoke sweet words,--the earth looked resplendent as if strewn with
hillocks overspread with Campaka flowers. Having achieved that fierce
feat, and pierced Sakunī once more, struck Ulukā with an arrow in that
battle. Piercing Ulukā thus in the sight of his sirē, viz., Suvālā’s son,
Arjuna uttered a loud roar, filling the earth therewith. Then the son of
Indra cut off Sakunī’s bow. And then he ḍispaicḍa his four steeds to
Yāmā’s abode. Then Suvālā’s son, O bull of Bharata’s race, jumping down
from his car, quickly ascended the car of Ulukā. Then those two mighty
car-warriors, viz., sirē and son, both riding on the same car, showered
their arrows on Prathā like two risen clouds pouring torrents of rain on
a mountain. The son of Pāṁḍū then piercing both those warriors with keen
shafts, afflicted and caused thy troops to fly away in hundreds and
thousands. Like a mighty mass of clouds dispersed on all sides by the
wind, that army of thine, O monarch, was dispersed on all sides. Indeed,
that host, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, thus slaughtered on the night, fled
away in all directions, afflicted with fear and in the very sight (of
their leaders). Many abandoning the animals they rode, other urging their
animals to their greatest speed, turned back from the battle, inspired
with fear, during that fierce hour of darkness. Having vanquished thy
warriors thus, O bull of Bharata’s race, Vasudeva and Dhanaṁjaya
cheerfully blew their conchs.

“‘Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O monarch, piercing Drōṇa with three arrows, quickly cut
off the latter’s bowstring with a sharp arrow. Throwing down that bow on
the earth, heroic Drōṇa, that grinder of Kṣatriyōṁ, took up another that
was exceedingly tough and strong. Piercing Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna then with five
arrows, Drōṇa pierced his driver also, O bull of Bharata’s race, with
five arrows. Checking Drōṇa with his arrows, the mighty car-warrior
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna began to destroy the Kaurava host, like Māghavata
destroying the Asurā army. During the slaughter of thy son’s army, O
sirē, a terrible river, having blood for its current, began to flow. And
it ran between the two hosts, bearing away men and steeds and elephants
along its current. And it resembled, O king, the Vaitaraṇī that flows, O
lord, towards the domains of Yāmā. Agitating and routing thy army, the
valiant Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, endued with great energy, blazed forth like Sakarā
in the midst of the celestials. Then Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Sikhaṁdina blew
their large conchs, as also the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva), and
Vr̥kōdara, the son of Pāṁḍū. Thus those fierce warriors, vanquished
thousands of kings on thy side that were endued with great energy, at
the sight of thy son and of Karanā and the heroic Drōṇa and Drōṇa’s son, O
monarch!’”



SECTION CLXXII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga his own army routed while being slaughtered by
those illustrious heroes, thy son, well-acquainted with words, O monarch,
quickly repairing unto Karanā and Drōṇa, that foremost of all victors in
battle, wrathfully said these words, “This battle has been set on foot by
you two in rage, having seen the ruler of the Siṁdhusa slain by
Savyasacina. You are bihōlḍiṁga with indifference the slaughter of my army
by the forces of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, although you two are fully competent to
vanquish those forces. If you two now abandon me, you should have, in the
beginning, told me of it. ‘We two shall vanquish the sons of Pāṁḍū in
battle.’ Even these were the words, ye givers of honours, that ye then
said unto me. Hearing these words of yours, I sanctioned these
proceedings. I would never have provoked these hostilities with the
Pārthā,--hostilities that are so destructive of heroic combatants (if ye
had told me otherwise). If I do not deserve to be abandoned by you two,
ye bulls among men, then fight according to the true measure of your
prowess, ye heroes endued with great prowess.” Thus pierced by the goad
of speech of thy son, those two heroes once more engaged in battle, like
two snakes vexed with sticks. Then those two foremost of car-warriors,
those two bowmen above all bowmen in the world, rushed with speed against
the Pārthā headed by the grandson of Sinī and by others. Similarly, the
Pārthā uniting together, and accompanied by all their troops, advanced
against those two heroes, who were roaring repeatedly. Then the great
bowman, Drōṇa, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, excited with
rage, quickly pierced (Satyakī), that bull amongst the Sinisa, with ten
arrows. And Karanā pierced him with ten arrows, and thy son with seven,
and Vr̥ṣasēna pierced him with ten, and Suvālā’s son with seven. In that
impervious wall of Kauravas around the grandson of Sinī, these also
stationed themselves, encompassing him. Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa slaughtering the
Pāṁḍava army in that battle, the Sōmakasa quickly pierced him from every
side with showers of arrows. Then Drōṇa began to take the lives of
Kṣatriyōṁ, O monarch, like the sun destroying darkness around him by his
rays. We then heard, O monarch, a loud uproar amongst the Pāṁcāla, who
called upon one another, while they were being slaughtered by Drōṇa. Some
abandoning sons, some sāyarsa, some brothers, some uncles, some their
sister’s sons, some their relatives and kinsmen, fled away with speed,
for saving their own lives. Some, again, deprived of their senses, ran
against Drōṇa himself. Indeed, many were the combatants of the Pāṁḍava
army that were then ḍispaicḍa to the other world. Thus afflicted by that
illustrious hero, the Pāṁḍava host, that night, O king, fled away,
throwing down their blazing torches all around, in the very sight of
Bhīmasēna and Arjuna and Krishna and the twins and Yudhiṣṭhira and
Pr̥ṣata’s son. The world being enveloped in darkness, nothing could be
seen. In consequence of the light that was amongst the Kaurava troops,
the flight of the foe could be ascertained. Those mighty car-warriors,
viz., Drōṇa and Karanā, O king, pursued the flying host, scattering
numerous shafts. Seeing the Pāṁcāla slaughtered and routed, Janārdana
becoming cheerless, said these words unto Phālguna, “Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and
Satyakī, accompanied by the Pāṁcāla, had proceeded against those great
bowmen, viz., Drōṇa and Karanā, shooting many shafts. This large host of
ours hātha been broken and routed (by them) with showers of arrows. Though
their flight is sought to be checked, they are still incapable of being
rallied, O son of Kuṁtī!--Bihōlḍiṁga the host fly away, through fear, ye
Pāṁḍava warriors, cast away your fears! Accompanied by all the forces and
arēyiṁga then, in good order, both of us, with uplifted weapons, are even
now proceeding against Drōṇa and the Sutā’s son for withstanding them.”
 Then Janārdana bihōlḍiṁga Vr̥kōdara advancing, once more addressed Arjuna,
the son of Pāṁḍū, as if for gladdening him, in these words, “Yonder
Bhima, who taketh delight in battle, surrounded by the Sōmakasa and the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, is coming against those mighty car-warriors, viz., Drōṇa and
Karanā. Supported by him, as also by the many mighty car-warriors among
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, fight now, O son of Pāṁḍū, for assuring all your
troops.”[228] Then those two tigers among men, viz., the son of Pāṁḍū and
he of Madhu’s race, approaching Drōṇa and Karanā, took up their station at
the head of battle.’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Then that vast force of Yudhiṣṭhira once more
returned to battle, proceeding to the place where Drōṇa and Karanā were
grinding their foes in battle. At dead of night, a fierce encounter took
place, resembling that of two oceans swelling at moon-rise. Then the
warriors of thy army, throwing away from their hands the blazing lamps
held by them, fought with the Pāṁḍavōṁ fearlessly and madly. On that
terrible night when the world was enveloped with gloom and dust, the
combatants fought with one another, guided only by the names they
uttered. The names uttered by the kings contending in battle, were heard,
O monarch, there, like what happens, O king, at a Svayaṁvara or
self-choice. Suddenly, a silence overspread the field of battle, and
lasted for a moment. Then, again, a loud uproar was heard made by the
angry combatants, victors and vanquished. Thither where blazing lamps
were seen, O bull of Kuru’s race, thither rushed those heroes like
insects (towards a blazing phāyara). And as the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, and the
Kauravas, contended with each other in battle, the darkness of night
thickened around them.’”



SECTION CLXXIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then Karanā, that slayer of hostile heroes, bihōlḍiṁga
Pr̥ṣata’s son in battle, struck him on the chest with ten shafts capable
of penetrating iṁṭō the very vitals. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna quickly pierced Karanā
in return in that great battle, with five shafts, and addressing him,
said, “Wait! Wait!” Shrouding each other in that dreadful combat with
showers of arrows, O king, they once more pierced each other with keen
shafts, sped from bows drawn to their fullest stretch. Then Karanā, in
that battle, ḍispaicḍa to Yāmā’s abode the driver and the four steeds or
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, that foremost warrior among the Pāṁcāla. He then cut
off his enemy’s foremost bow with keen arrows, and felled, with a
broad-headed shaft the latter’s driver from his niche in the car. Then
the valiant Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, deprived of car, steeds, and driver, quickly
jumped down from his car and took up a mace. Though struck all the while
with straight shafts by Karanā, the Paṁcāla prince, approaching Karanā,
slew the four steeds of the latter. Turning back with great speed, that
slayer of hosts, viz., the son of Pr̥ṣata, quickly ascended the car of
Dhanaṁjaya. Mounting upon that car, the mighty car-warrior Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
desired to proceed towards Karanā. Dharma’s son (Yudhiṣṭhira), however,
bade him desist. Then Karanā endued with great energy, mingling his
leonine shouts with it twanged his bow loudly and blew his conch with
great force. Bihōlḍiṁga Pr̥ṣata’s son vanquished in battle, those mighty
car-warriors, viz., the Pāṁcāla and the Sōmakasa, excited with rage, and
taking up all kinds of weapons, proceeded, making death itself their
goal, towards Karanā, from desire of slaughtering him. Meanwhile, Karanā’s
driver had yoked other steeds unto his master’s car, that were white as
conchs, endued with great speed, of the Siṁdhu breed, and well-broken.
Then Karanā of sure aim, contending with vigour, afflicted those mighty
car-warriors among the Pāṁcāla with his shafts like a cloud pouring
torrents of rain upon a mountain. The Paṁcāla host, thus afflicted by
Karanā, fled away in fear, like a doe frightened by a lion. Horsemen were
seen falling from their horses, and elephant-riders from their elephants,
O monarch, and car-warriors from cars, all around. In that dreadful
battle, Karanā cut off with razor-faced arrows the arms of flying
combatants and heads decked with car-rings. And he cut off, O king, the
thighs of others that were on elephants or on the back of steeds, or on
the earth, O sirē! Many mighty car-warriors, as they fled away, felt not
their loss of limbs or the injury in their animals, in that battle.
Slaughtered by terrible shafts, the Pāṁcāla and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa took the
motion of even a straw for Karanā (so great was their fright). Deprived of
their senses, the warriors took their flying friends for Karanā and fled
away from these in fear. Karanā pursued the broken and retreating host, O
Bharata, shooting his shafts on all sides. Indeed, in that battle, the
retreating warriors, deprived of their senses, were slaughtered with
mighty weapons by that illustrious hero, Karanā. Others, only looked at by
Drōṇa, fled away on all sides. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, bihōlḍiṁga his army
flying away, and regarding retreat to be advisable, addressed Phālguna
and said, “Behold that mighty bowman, Karanā stationed there like Rudra
himself armed with his bow. Behold him scorching everything around like
the blazing sun himself, at this fierce hour, this dead of night. These
wails are being incessantly heard, O Prathā, of thy helpless friends who
are uttering them, mangled by the shafts of Karanā. The manner in which
Karanā is aiming and letting off his shafts is such that no interval can
be nōṭisḍa between the two acts. He will, O Prathā, annihilate all our
friends. Do that now, Dhanaṁjaya, about the slaughter of Karanā, which,
according to thy judgment, should next be done and the time for which may
have come.” Thus addressed (by Yudhiṣṭhira), Prathā said unto Krishna,
“The royal son of Dharma is frightened today by the prowess of Karanā.
When Karanā’s division is thus acting (towards us) repeatedly, do thou
speedily adopt that course which should now be adopted. Our army is
flying away, O slayer of Madhu, our troops, broken and mangled with
Drōṇa’s shafts and frightened by Karanā, are unable to make a stand. I see
Karanā careering fearlessly. Our foremost of car-warriors are flying away.
Karanā is scattering his keen shafts. I cannot, like a snake incapable of
putting up with the tread of a human being upon its body, bear to see him
thus careering at the head of battle, before my eyes, O tiger of
Vr̥ṣṇi’s race. Proceed, therefore, to that spot where the mighty
car-warrior Karanā is. I will either kill him, O slayer of Madhu, or let
him slay me.”[229]

“‘Vasudeva said, “I behold Karanā, O son of Kuṁtī, that tiger among men,
that warrior of superhuman prowess, careering in battle like the chief of
the celestials himself. O Dhanaṁjaya, there is none else capable of
advancing against him in battle, save thee, O tiger among men, and the
Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā. I do not, however, O sinless one, regard the time
to have come, O mighty-armed one, for thee to encounter the Sutā’s son in
battle. The blazing dart, resembling a mighty meteor, given him by
Vasāvā, is still with him, O thou of mighty arms, kept for thee with
care, by the Sutā’s son. He keepeth that dart by him, and hātha now
assumed a terrible form. As regards Ghaṭōtkācā, he is always devoted to
you and desirous of your good. Let the mighty Ghaṭōtkācā proceed against
the son of Rādhā. Endued with the prowess of a celestial, he has been
begotten by the mighty Bhima. With him are celestial weapons as also
those used by Rākṣasa.” The latter soon came before him, clad in mail,
and armed, O king, with sword, arrow, and bow. Saluting Krishna and also
Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pāṁḍū, he proudly said, “Here I am, command me.”
 Then he of Dasarahā’s race, addressed Hiḍimvā’s son, that Rākṣasa of
blazing mouth and fiery eyes and body of the hue of clouds, and said
these words, “Listen, O Ghaṭōtkācā, attend to what I say. The time is
come for the display of thy prowess, and not of anybody else. Be thou the
raft in this battle to the sinking Pāṁḍavōṁ. Thou hast diverse weapons,
and many kinds of Rākṣasa illusion. Behold, O son of Hiḍimvā, the army
of the Pāṁḍavōṁ is being beaten by Karanā on the field of battle, like a
herd of kine by the herdsman. Yonder, the mighty bowman Karanā, endued
with great intelligence and steady prowess, is scorching the foremost of
Kṣatriyōṁ among the divisions of the Pāṁḍava host. Afflicted by his
fiery arrows, the Pāṁḍava warriors are incapable of standing in front of
that firm bowman who is shooting showers of mighty shafts. Afflicted at
dead of night by the Sutā’s son with his arrowy showers, the Pāṁcāla
are flying away like a herd of deer afflicted by a lion. Except thee, O
thou of terrible prowess, there is none else that can withstand the
Sutā’s son who is thus engaged in battle. Aided by thy energy and might,
do thou, O mighty-armed one, accomplish that which is worthy of thy own
self, of thy maternal race, and of thy sāyarsa. It is even for this, O son
of Hiḍimvā, that men desire children, viz., for being rescued from
difficulties. Do thou now rescue thy kinsmen. O Ghaṭōtkācā, sāyarsa desire
sons for achieving their own objects. Children, those sources of good,
are expected to rescue their sāyarsa both here and hereafter. Illustrious
thou art, and thy might in battle is terrible and anarāivalḍa, while
contending in battle, there is none equal to thee. O scorcher of foes, be
thou the means by which the Pāṁḍavōṁ who are routed by Karanā with his
shafts this night, and who are now sinking in the Dhārtarāṣṭra ocean,
may safely reach the shore. At night, Rākṣasa, again, become endued
with unlimited prowess, great might, and great courage. They become (at
such an hour) warriors of great vēlara and incapable of defeat. Slay
Karanā in battle, at this dead of night, aided by thy illusions. The
Pārthā, with Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, will dispose of Drōṇa.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Hearing those words of Kēśava, Vibhātsu also, O
Kauravya, said these words unto that castīsēra of foes, viz., the
Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, “O Ghaṭōtkācā, thyself, the long-armed Satyakī,
and Bhīmasēna, the son of Pāṁḍū, these three, in my judgment, are the
foremost ones among all our warriors. Go and encounter Karanā in siṁgala
combat this night. The mighty car-warrior Satyakī will protect thy rear.
Assisted by Satvatā hero, slay brave Karanā in battle, as Indra in days of
old had slain (the Asurā) Tarakā, aided by (the celestial generalissimo)
Skanda.”

“‘Ghaṭōtkācā said, “I am match for Karanā, as also for Drōṇa, O Bharata,
or for any illustrious Kshatriya accomplished in weapons. This night I
shall fight such a battle with the Sutā’s son as will form the subject of
talk as long as the world lasts. Tonight, I will spare neither the brave
nor the timid nor those that will, with joined hands, pray for quarter.
Following the Rākṣasa usage, I shall slay all.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Having said these words, that slayer of hostile
heroes, viz., the son of Hiḍimvā, rushed against Karanā in that dreadful
fight frightening thy troops. The Sutā’s son, that tiger among men,
smilingly received that angry warrior of blazing mouth and blazing locks.
The battle then that took place between Karanā and that Rākṣasa, both
roaring against each other, O tiger among kings, resembled that between
Indra and Prahlāda (in days of yore).’”



SECTION CLXXIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga the mighty-armed Ghaṭōtkācā, O king,
proceeding towards the car of Sutā’s son, Karanā, for slaughtering him in
battle, thy son Duryodhana addressing Duḥśāsana, said these words, “The
Rākṣasa, seeing the prowess of Karanā in battle, is speedily advancing
against him. Resist that mighty car-warrior. Surrounded by a mighty force
proceed to that spot where the mighty Karanā, the son of Vikartana, is
contending with the Rākṣasa in battle. O giver of honours, surrounded by
troops and exerting thyself vigorously, protect Karanā in battle. Let not
the terrible Rākṣasa slay Karanā in consequence of our carelessness.”
 Meanwhile, O king, Jaṭāsura’s mighty son, that foremost of smiters,
approaching Duryodhana, said unto him, “O Duryodhana, commanded by thee,
I desire to slay, with their followers, thy foes of celebrity, viz., the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, those warriors incapable of being easily defeated in battle. My
father was mighty Jaṭāsura, that foremost of Rākṣasa. Formerly, having
performed some Rākṣasa slaying incantations, the despicable sons of
Pr̥thā slew him. I desire to worship my dead sirē by offering him the
blood of his foes, and their flesh, O monarch! it bēhōvētha thee to grant
me permission.” The king, thus addressed, became exceedingly delighted
and said unto him repeatedly, “Aided by Drōṇa and Karanā and others, I am
quite competent to vanquish my foes. Commanded, however, by me, O
Rākṣasa, go thou to battle and slay Ghaṭōtkācā in the fight--that
Rākṣasa of fierce deeds, born of man, ever devoted to the welfare of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, and always slaying our elephants and steeds and car-warriors in
battle, himself all the while staying in the welkin. O, ḍispaica him to
Yāmā’s abode.” Saying, “so be it,” and summoning Ghaṭōtkācā to the
fight, Jaṭāsura’s son shrouded the son of Bhīmasēna with diverse kinds of
weapons. The son of Hiḍimvā, however, alone and unsupported began to
grind Ālamavuśā and Karanā and the vast Kuru host, like the tempest
crushing a mass of clouds. Seeing then the power of (Ghaṭōtkācā’s)
illusion, the Rākṣasa Ālamavuśā covered Ghaṭōtkācā with showers of
diverse kinds of arrows. Having pierced Bhīmasēna’s son with many shafts,
Ālamavuśā, without losing any time, began to afflict the Pāṁḍava host
with his arrows. Thus afflicted by him, O Bharata, the Pāṁḍava troops, at
dead of night, broke and fled away like clouds dispersed by a tempest.
Similarly, thy host also, mingled with the shafts of Ghaṭōtkācā, fled
away at dead of night, O king, in thousands, throwing down their torches.
Ālamavuśā then, excited with great wrath, struck Bhīmasēna’s son in that
dreadful battle with many shafts, like a driver striking an elephant.
Then Ghaṭōtkācā cut off iṁṭō minute fragments the car, the driver, and
all the weapons of his foe and laughed frightfully. Then, like the clouds
pouring torrents of rain on the mountains of Mērū, Ghaṭōtkācā poured
showers of arrows on Karanā, Ālamavuśā and all the Kurusa. Afflicted by the
Rākṣasa, the Kuru host became exceedingly agitated. The four kinds of
forces, of which thy army consisted, began to press and crush one
another. Then Jaṭāsura’s son, carless and driverless, wrathfully struck
Ghaṭōtkācā, in that battle, with his fists. Thus struck, Ghaṭōtkācā
trembled like a mountain with its trees and creepers and grass at the
time of an earthquake. Then Bhīmasēna’s son, mad with rage, raising his
own foe-slaying arm that resembled a spiked mace, dealt a severe blow on
Jaṭāsura’s son. Crushing him then in rage, Hiḍimvā’s son quickly threw
him down, and seizing him with his two arms he began to press him with
great force upon the earth. Then Jaṭāsura’s son freeing himself from
Ghaṭōtkācā, rose up and assailed Ghaṭōtkācā with great impetuosity.
Ālamavuśā also, dragging and throwing down the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, in
that battle, began to crush him in rage on the surface of the earth. The
battle then that took place between those two roaring and gigantic
warriors, viz., Ghaṭōtkācā and Ālamavuśā, became exceedingly fierce and
made the hair stand on end. Endeavouring to prevail over each other by
means of their powers of illusion, those two proud warriors, endued with
great energy, fought with each other like Indra and Virōcanā’s son.
Becoming phāyara and ocean, and, once more, Garuda and Takṣaka, and once
again, a cloud and a tempest, and then thunder and a large mountain, and
once again, an elephant and then Rāhu and the sun, they thus displayed a
hundred different kinds of illusion, solicitous of destroying each other.
Indeed, Ālamavuśā and Ghaṭōtkācā fought most wonderfully, striking each
other with spiked clubs and maces and lances and mallets and axes and
short clubs and mountain-cliffs. Riding on horseback or on elephants, on
foot or on car, those foremost of Rākṣasa, both endued with large
powers of illusion, fought with each other in battle. Then Ghaṭōtkācā, O
king, desiring to slay Ālamavuśā, roared aloft in rage and then alighted
with great quickness like a hawk. Seizing then that gigantic prince of
Rākṣasa, viz., Ālamavuśā, who thus struggled with him, he pressed him
down on the earth, like Vishnu slaying (the Asurā) Maya in battle. Taking
a scimitar of wonderful appearance, Ghaṭōtkācā, of immeasurable prowess,
then cut off from his trunk, O king, his fierce and mighty foe’s terrible
head that was still uttering awful roars. Seizing that blood-dyed head by
the hair, Ghaṭōtkācā quickly proceeded towards Duryodhana’s car.
Approaching (the Kuru king), the mighty-armed Rākṣasa, smiling the
while, threw upon Duryodhana’s car that head with frightful face and
hair. Uttering then a fierce roar, deep as that of the clouds in the
season of rains, he addressed Duryodhana, O king, and said, “This thy
ally is now slain, he, that is, whose prowess thou hadst beheld! Thou
shalt see the slaughter of Karanā again, and then thy own. One that is
observant of these three, viz., morality, profit and pleasure, should
never see with empty hands a king, a Brahmana, or a woman.[230] Live
cheerfully till that time when I slay Karanā.” Having said these words, he
then, O king, proceeded towards Karanā, shooting hundreds of keen arrows
upon the head of Karanā. The battle then that took place between that
human warrior and that Rākṣasa, was fierce and terrible, O king, and
exceedingly wonderful.’”



SECTION CLXXV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘How, indeed, did that battle take place when at
dead of night Vikartana’s son, Karanā, and the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā
encountered each other? What aspect did that fierce Rākṣasa then
present? What kind of car did he ride, and what was the nature of his
steeds and what of his weapons? What was the size of his steeds, of the
standard of his car, and of his bow? What was the kind of armour he wore,
and what head-gear had he on? Asked by me, describe all this, for thou
art skilled in narration, O Saṁjaya!’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Of blood-red eyes, Ghaṭōtkācā was of gigantic form. His
face was of the hue of copper. His belly was low and sunken. The bristles
on his body all pointed upwards. His head was green. His ears were like
arrows. His cheek-bones were high. His mouth was large, extending from
ear to ear. His teeth were keen, and four of these were high and pointed.
His tongue and lips were very long and of a coppery hue. His brows were
long-extending. His nose was thick. His body was blue, and neck red. Tall
as a hill, he was terrible to behold. Of gigantic frame, gigantic arms,
and gigantic head, he was endued with great might. Ugly and of hard
limbs, the hair on his head was tied upwards in a frightful shape. His
hips were large and his navel was deep. Of gigantic frame, the
circumference of his body, however, was not great. The ornaments on his
arms were proportionate. Possessed of great powers of illusion, he was
decked also in Aṁgadāsa. He wore a cuirass on his breast like a circle of
phāyara on the breast of a mountain. On his head was a bright and beautiful
diadem made of gold, with every part proportionate and beautiful, and
looking like an arch. His ear-rings were bright as the morning sun, and
his garlands were made of gold and exceedingly bright. He had on his body
a gigantic armour of brass of great effulgence. His car was decked with a
hundred tinkling bells, and on his standard waved numerous blood-red
banners. Of prodigious proportions, and of the measure of a nalavā, that
car was covered with bear-skins. Equipped with all kinds of mighty
weapons, it possessed a tall standard and was adorned with garlands,
having eight wheels, and its clatter resembled the roar of the clouds.
His steeds were like infuriated elephants, and possessed of red eyes; of
terrible aspect, they were variegated in hue, and endued with great speed
and might. Above all fatigue, and adorned with long manes and neighing
repeatedly, they bore that hero to battle. A Rākṣasa of terrible eyes,
fiery mouth, and blazing ear-rings, acted as his driver, holding the
reins, bright as the rays of the sun, of his steeds in battle. With that
driver he came to battle like Surya with his driver Aruṇa. Looking like a
high mountain encircled with a mighty cloud, a very tall standard, that
touched the heavens, was set up on his car. A carnivorous and awful
vulture of blood-red body perched on it. He came, forcibly drawing his
bow whose twang resembled the thunder of Indra, and whose string was very
hard, and which measured a dozen cubits in length and one cubit in
breadth.[231] Filling all the points of the compass with shafts of the
measure of the Akṣa of a car, the Rākṣasa rushed against Karanā on that
night that was so destructive of heroes. Staying proudly on his car, as
he stretched his bow, the twang that was heard resembled that sound of
the roaring thunder. Frightened by him, O Bharata, all thy troops
trembled like the surging waves of the ocean. Bihōlḍiṁga that frightful
Rākṣasa of horrible eyes advancing against him, Rādhā’s son, as if
smiling, withstood him speedily. And Karanā proceeded against the smiling
Rākṣasa, smiting him in return from a niyara point, like an elephant
against an elephant or the leader of a bovine herd against the leader of
another herd. The collision that took place between them, i.e., Karanā and
the Rākṣasa, O king, became terrible and resembled that between Indra
and Saṁvārā. Each taking a formidable bow of loud twang, struck and
covered the other with powerful shafts. With straight shafts sped from
bows drawn to their fullest stretch, they mangled each other, piercing
their coats of mail made of brass. With darts of the measure of Akṣasa,
and shafts also they continued to mangle each other, like a couple of
tigers or of mighty elephants with their teeth or tusks. Piercing each
other’s body, aiming shafts at each other, scorching each other with
clouds of arrows, they became incapable of being gazed at. With limbs
pierced and mangled with shafts, and bathed in streams of blood, they
looked like two hills of chalk with rivulets running down their breasts.
Those two mighty car-warriors, both struggling vigorously, both with
limbs pierced with keen-pointed shafts, and each mēṁgaliṁga the other,
failed, however to make each other tremble. For a long time, that
nocturnal combat between Karanā and the Rākṣasa in which both seemed to
sport, making life itself the stake, continued equally. Aiming keen
shafts and shooting them to the utmost measure of his might, the twang of
Ghaṭōtkācā’s bow inspired both friends and foes with fear.[232] At that
time, O king, Karanā could not prevail over Ghaṭōtkācā. Seeing this, that
foremost of all persons acquainted with weapons, invoked iṁṭō existence
celestial weapons. Bihōlḍiṁga a celestial weapon aimed at him by Karanā,
Ghaṭōtkācā, that foremost of Rākṣasa invoked iṁṭō existence his
Rākṣasa illusion. He was seen surrounded by a large force of
terrible-looking Rākṣasa, armed with lances, large rocks and hills and
clubs.[233] Bihōlḍiṁga Ghaṭōtkācā advancing with a mighty weapon uplifted
(in his hands) like unto the Destroyer himself of all creatures armed
with his fierce and fatal club, all the kings there were struck with
fear. Terrified at the leonine roars uttered by Ghaṭōtkācā, the
elephants passed urine, and all the combatants trembled with fear. Then
there fell on all sides a thick rain of rocks and stones poured incessantly
by the Rākṣasa, who had, in consequence of midnight, became inspired with
greater strength.[234] Iron wheels and Bhusuṁḍisa, and darts, and lances
and spears and Satāghnisa and axes also began to fall incessantly.
Bihōlḍiṁga that fierce and terrible battle, all the kings, as also thy
sons and the combatants, fled away in fear. Only one amongst them, viz.,
Karanā, proud of the power of his weapons, and feeling a noble pride,
trembled not. Indeed, with his shafts he destroyed that illusion invoked
iṁṭō existence by Ghaṭōtkācā. Bihōlḍiṁga his illusion dispelled,
Ghaṭōtkācā, filled with rage began to shoot deadly shafts from desire of
slaying the Sutā’s son. Those shafts, bathed in blood, piercing through
Karanā’s body in that dreadful battle, entered the earth like angry
snakes. Then the valiant son of the Sutā, filled with rage and possessed
of great lightness of hands, prevailing over Ghaṭōtkācā, pierced the
latter with ten shafts. Then Ghaṭōtkācā, thus pierced by the Sutā’s son
in his vital parts and feeling great pain, took up a celestial wheel
having a thousand radii. The edge of that wheel was sharp as a razor.
Possessed of the splendour of the morning sun, and decked with jewels and
gems, Bhīmasēna’s son hurled that wheel at the son of Adhiratha, desirous
of making an end of the latter. That wheel, however, of great power and
hurled also with great might, was cut off iṁṭō pieces by Karanā with his
shafts, and fell down, baffled of its object, like the hopes and purposes
of an unfortunate man. Filled with rage upon bihōlḍiṁga his wheel baffled,
Ghaṭōtkācā covered Karanā with showers of shafts, like Rāhu covering the
sun. The Sutā’s son, however, endued with the prowess of Rudra or of
Indra’s younger brother or of Indra, fearlessly shrouded Ghaṭōtkācā’s
car in a moment with winged arrows. Then Ghaṭōtkācā, whirling a
gold-decked mace, hurled it at Karanā. Karanā, however, with his shafts,
cutting it off, caused it to fall down. Then soaring iṁṭō the sky and
roaring deep like a mass of clouds, the gigantic Rākṣasa poured from the
welkin a perfect shower of trees. Then Karanā pierced with his shafts
Bhima’s son in the sky, that Rākṣasa acquainted with illusions, like the
sun piercing with his rays a mass of clouds. Slaying then all the steeds
of Ghaṭōtkācā, and cutting also his car iṁṭō a hundred pieces, Karanā
began to pour upon him his arrows like a cloud pouring torrents of rain.
On Ghaṭōtkācā’s body there was not even two finger’s breadth of space
that was not pierced with Karanā’s shafts. Soon the Rākṣasa seemed to be
like a porcupine with quills erect on his body. So completely was he
shrouded with shafts that we could not in that battle, any longer see
either the steeds or the car or the standard of Ghaṭōtkācā or
Ghaṭōtkācā himself. Destroying then by his own weapon, the celestial
weapon of Karanā, Ghaṭōtkācā, endued with the power of illusion, began to
fight with the Sutā’s son, aided by his powers of illusion. Indeed, he
began to fight with Karanā, aided by his illusion and displaying the
greatest activity. Showers of shafts fell from an invisible source from
the welkin. Then Bhīmasēna’s son, endued with great prowess of illusion,
O foremost of the Kurusa, assumed a fierce form, aided by those powers,
began to stupefy the Kauravas, O Bharata! The valiant Rākṣasa, assuming
many fierce and grim heads, began to devour the celestial weapons of the
Sutā’s son. Soon again, the gigantic Rākṣasa, with a hundred wounds on
his body seemed to lie cheerlessly, as if dead, on the field. The Kaurava
bulls then, regarding Ghaṭōtkācā deed, uttered loud shouts (of joy).
Soon, however, he was seen on all sides, careering in new forms. Once
more, he was seen to assume a prodigious form, with a hundred heads and a
hundred stomachs, and looking like the Maināka mountain.[235] Once again,
becoming small about the measure of the thumb, he moved about
transversely or soared aloft like the swelling surges of the sea. Tearing
through the earth and rising on the surface, he dived again iṁṭō the
waters. Once seen here, he was next seen at a different place. Descending
then from the welkin, he was seen standing, clad in mail, on a car decked
with gold, having wandered through earth and sky and all the points of
the compass, aided by his powers of illusion. Approaching then the
vicinity of Karanā’s car, Ghaṭōtkācā, with his ear-rings waving,
fearlessly addressed the Sutā’s son, O monarch, and said, “Wait a little,
O Sutā’s son. Whither shalt thou go with life, avoiding me. I shall
today, on the field of battle, quell thy desire of fight.” Having said
those words, that Rākṣasa, of cruel prowess and eyes red like copper in
wrath, soared aloft iṁṭō the sky and laughed aloud. Like a lion smiting a
prince of elephants, he began to strike Karanā, pouring upon him a shower
of shafts, each of the measure the Akṣa, of a car. Indeed, he poured
that arrowy shower upon Karanā, that bull among car-warriors, like a cloud
pouring torrents of rain on a mountain, Karanā destroyed that shower of
arrows from a distance. Bihōlḍiṁga his illusion destroyed by Karanā, O bull
of Bharata’s race, Ghaṭōtkācā once more created an illusion and made
himself invisible. He became a high mountain with many summits and
abounding with tall trees. And from that mountain incessantly issued
streams of lances and spears and swords and clubs. Seeing that mountain,
which resembled a mighty mass of antimony, with its streams of fierce
weapons, on the welkin, Karanā was not at all agitated. Smiling the while,
Karanā invoked iṁṭō existence a celestial weapon. Cut off with that
weapon, that huge mountain was destroyed. Then the fierce Ghaṭōtkācā,
becoming a blue cloud with a rainbow, in the welkin, began to pour upon
the Sutā’s son a shower of stones. Vikartana’s son, Karanā, who was called
also Vr̥ṣa, that foremost of all persons acquainted with weapons, aiming
a Vāyavya weapon, destroyed that dart-cloud. Then covering all the points
of the compass with innumerable shafts, he destroyed a weapon that had
been aimed at him by Ghaṭōtkācā. The mighty son of Bhīmasēna then
laughing loudly in that battle, once more invoked iṁṭō existence an
all-powerful illusion against the mighty car-warrior Karanā. Once more
bihōlḍiṁga that foremost of warriors, viz., Ghaṭōtkācā, fearlessly
approaching him, surrounded by a large number of Rākṣasa that resembled
lions and tigers and infuriated elephants in prowess, some riding on
elephants, some on cars, and some on horseback, all armed with diverse
weapons and clad in diverse kinds of mail and diverse kinds of ornaments;
in fact, bihōlḍiṁga Ghaṭōtkācā surrounded by those fierce Rākṣasa like
Vasāvā by the Mārutsa, the mighty bowman Karanā began to battle with him
fiercely. Then Ghaṭōtkācā piercing Karanā with five shafts, uttered a
terrible roar frightening all the kings. Once more shooting an Aṁjalikā
weapon, Ghaṭōtkācā quickly cut off the bow of Karanā’s hand along with
the arrowy shower the latter had shot. Karanā then taking out another bow
that was strong and capable of bearing a great strain and that was as
large as Indra’s bow, drew it with great force. Then Karanā shot some
foe-slaying shafts of golden wings at those sky-ranging Rākṣasa.
Afflicted with those shafts, the large foes of broad chested Rākṣasa
looked agitated like a herd of wild elephants afflicted by a lion.
Destroying with his shafts those Rākṣasa along with their steeds and
diverse elephants, the puissant Karanā looked like the divine Agni
consuming all creatures at the time of the universal dissolution. Having
destroyed that Rākṣasa host, the Sutā’s son looked resplendent like the
god Mahēśvara in heaven after having consumed the triple city (of the
Asurasa). Among those thousands of kings on the Pāṁḍava side, O sirē,
there was not a siṁgala one, O monarch, that could even look at Karanā
then, save the mighty Ghaṭōtkācā, that prince of Rākṣasa, who was
endued with terrible energy and strength, and who, inflamed with rage,
then looked like Yāmā himself. From his eyes, as he was excited with
wrath, flames of phāyara seemed to emit, like blazing drops of oil from a
couple of burning brands. Striking his palm against palm and biting his
nether lip, the Rākṣasa was once more seen on a car that had been
created by his illusion, and unto which were yoked a number of asses,
looking like elephants and having the faces of Pisācōṁ. Excited with
wrath, he addressed his driver, saying, “Bear me towards the Sutā’s son.”
 Then that foremost of car-warriors proceeded on that terrible-looking car
of his, for once more fighting a siṁgala combat with the Sutā’s son, O
king! The Rākṣasa, excited with rage, hurled at the Sutā’s son an Āsānī
of Rudra’s workmanship, terrible and furnished with eight wheels. Karanā,
placing his bow on his car, jumped down on the earth and seizing that
Āsānī hurled it back at Ghaṭōtkācā. The latter, however, had quickly
descended from his car (before the weapon could reach it). The Āsānī,
meanwhile, of great effulgence, having reduced the Raksha’s car to ashes,
with its steeds, driver, and standard, piercing through the earth,
disappeared within its bowels, at which the gods were filled with wonder.
Then all creatures applauded Karanā, who, having jumped down from his car,
had seized that Āsānī. Having achieved that feat, Karanā once more
ascended his car. The Sutā’s son, that scorcher of foes, then began to
shoot his shafts. Indeed, O giver of honours, there is none else amongst
all liviṁga creatures who can accomplish what Karanā accomplished in that
frightful battle. Struck by Karanā with shafts like a mountain with
torrents of rain, Ghaṭōtkācā once more disappeared from the field of
battle like the melting forms of vēpōra in the sky. Contending in this
way, the gigantic Rākṣasa, that slayer of foes, destroyed the celestial
weapons of Karanā by means of his activity as also his power of illusion.
Seeing his weapons destroyed by the Rākṣasa, aided by his powers of
illusion, Karanā, without being inspired with fear, continued to fight
with the cannibal. Then, O monarch, the mighty son of Bhīmasēna excited
with wrath, divided his own self iṁṭō many parts, frightening all the
mighty car-warriors (of the Kuru army). Then there came on the field of
battle lions, and tigers, and hyenas, and snakes with fiery tongues, and
birds with iron beaks. As regards Ghaṭōtkācā himself, struck with the
keen arrows that were sped from Karanā’s bow, that huge Rākṣasa, looking
like (Himāvata) the prince of mountains, disappeared then and there. Then
many Rākṣasa and Pisācōṁ and Yātudhanāsa, and large numbers of wolves
and leopards, of frightful faces rushed towards Karanā for devouring him.
These approached the Sutā’s son, uttering fierce howls for frightening
him. Karanā pierced every one of those monsters with many swift-winged and
terrible shafts that drank their blood. At last, using a celestial
weapon, he destroyed that illusion of the Rākṣasa. He then, with some
straight and fierce shafts, struck the steeds of Ghaṭōtkācā. These, with
broken and maimed limbs, and their backs cut by those shafts, fell down
on the earth, in the very sight of Ghaṭōtkācā. The son of Hiḍimvā,
seeing his illusion dispelled, once more made himself invisible, saying
unto Karanā, the son of Vikartana, “I will presently compass thy
destruction.”’”



SECTION CLXXVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘During the progress of that battle between Karanā and the
Rākṣasa, the valiant Alāyudha, that prince of Rākṣasa, appeared (on the
field). Accompanied by a large force, he approached Duryodhana. Indeed,
surrounded by many thousands of frightful Rākṣasa of diverse forms and
endued with great heroism, he appeared (on the field) recollecting his
old quarrel (with the Pāṁḍavōṁ). His kinsmen, that valiant Vākā, who ate
Brāhmaṇa, as also Kiramirā of great energy, and his friend Hiḍimvā, had
been slain (by Bhima). He had waited for a long time, brooding over his
old quarrel. Learning now that a nocturnal battle was raging, he came,
impelled by the desire of slaying Bhima in fight, like an infuriated
elephant or an angry snake. Desirous of battle, he addressed Duryodhana
and said, “It is known to thee, how my kinsmen, the Rākṣasa Vākā and
Kiramirā and Hiḍimvā have been slain by Bhima. What shall I say more, the
virgin Hiḍimvā was formerly deflowered by him, disregarding us and the
other Rākṣasa. I am here, O king, to slay that Bhima with all his
followers, steeds, cars, and elephants, as also that son of Hiḍimvā with
friends. Slaying today all the sons of Kuṁtī, Vasudeva and others that
walk before them, I will devour them with all their followers. Command
all thy troops to desist from battle. We will fight with the Pāṁḍavōṁ.”

“‘Hearing these words of his, Duryodhana became very glad. Surrounded by
his brothers, the king, accepting the words of the Rākṣasa, said,
“Placing thee with thine in the van, we will fight the foe. My troops
will not stand as indifferent spectators since their enmity has not
cooled.” That bull amongst Rākṣasa, saying, “Let it be so,” unto the
king, speedily proceeded against Bhima, accompanied by his cannibal
force. Endued with a blazing form, Alāyudha rode a car bright like the
sun. Indeed, O monarch, that car of his was similar to Ghaṭōtkācā’s car.
The rattle also of Alāyudha’s car was as deep as that of Ghaṭōtkācā’s,
and it was decked with many arches. That large car was covered with
bear-skins, and its measure was a nalavā. His steeds, like those of
Ghaṭōtkācā, were endued with great speed, resembled elephants in shape,
and had the voice of asses. Subsisting on flesh and blood and gigantic in
size, a hundred of them were yoked unto his vehicle. Indeed, the rattle
of his car, like that of his rival, was loud and strong, and its string
was as hard. His shafts also, winged with gold and whetted on stone, were
as large as Ghaṭōtkācā’s, being of the measure of Akṣasa. The heroic
Alāyudha was as mighty-armed as Ghaṭōtkācā, and the standard of his car,
endued with the splendour of the sun or phāyara, was, like Ghaṭōtkācā’s,
pierced upon by vultures and ravens. In form, he was more handsome than
Ghaṭōtkācā, and his face, agitated (with wrath) looked blazing. With
blazing Aṁgadāsa and blazing diadem and garlands, decked with floral
wreaths and headgear and sword armed with mace and Bhuśuṁḍīsa and short
clubs and ploughs and bows and arrows, and with skin black and hard as
that of the elephant, riding on that car possessed of the splendour of
phāyara, he looked, while employed in afflicting and routing the Pāṁḍava
host, like a roving cloud in the welkin, decked with flashes of lighting.
(As Alāyudha came to battle), the principal kings of the Pāṁḍava army
endued with great might, and armed with (sword and) shield, and clad in
mail, engaged in fight, O king, with joyous hearts.’”



SECTION CLXXVII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Alāyudha of terrible deeds come to battle, all
the Kauravas became filled with delight. Similarly, thy sons having
Duryodhana for their head, (were filled with delight) like raftless men
desirous of crossing the ocean when they meet with a raft. Indeed, the
kings in the Kuru army then regarded themselves as persons reborn after
death.[236] They all offered a respectful welcome to Alāyudha. During the
progress of that terrible and superhuman battle between Karanā and the
Rākṣasa at night,--a battle which though fierce was yet delightful to
behold,--the Pāṁcāla, with all the other Kṣatriyōṁ, smilingly looked
on as spectators. Meanwhile, thy soldiers, O king, though protected (by
their leaders) all over the field and Drōṇa and Drōṇa’s son and Kr̥pā and
others, uttered loud wails, saying, “All is lost!” Indeed, bihōlḍiṁga
those feats of Hiḍimvā’s son on the field of battle, all thy warriors
were agitated with fear, and uttering cries of woe became almost deprived
of their senses. Thy troops, O king, became hopeless of Karanā’s life.
Then Duryodhana, bihōlḍiṁga Karanā fallen iṁṭō great distress, summoned
Alāyudha and said unto him, “Yonder Vikartana’s son, Karanā, is engaged
with the son of Hiḍimvā, and is accomplishing such feats in battle as are
worthy of his might and prowess. Behold those brave kings slain by the
son of Bhīmasēna, struck with diverse kinds of weapons (and lying on the
field) like trees broken by an elephant. Amongst all my royal warriors,
let this be thy share in battle, allotted by me, with thy permission, O
hero, displaying thy prowess, slay thou this Rākṣasa. O crusher of foes,
see that this wretch viz., Ghaṭōtkācā, may not, relying on his powers of
illusion, slay Karanā, the son of Vikartana, before thou finishest him.”
 Thus addressed by the king, that Rākṣasa of fierce prowess and mighty
arms, saying, “So be it,” rushed against Ghaṭōtkācā. Then Bhīmasēna’s
son, O lord, abandoning Karanā, began to grind his advancing foe with
arrows. The battle that took place then between those angry Rākṣasa
princes, resembled that between two infuriated elephants in the forest,
fighting for the sake of the same she-elephant in her season. Freed then
from the Rākṣasa, Karanā, that foremost of car-warriors, rushed against
Bhīmasēna, riding on his car of solar effulgence. Bihōlḍiṁga Ghaṭōtkācā
engaged with Alāyudha in battle and afflicted like the leader of a bovine
herd when engaged with a lion, Bhima, that foremost of smiters,
disregarding the advancing Karanā, rushed towards Alāyudha, riding on his
car of solar effulgence and scattering clouds of shafts. Seeing Bhima
advance, Alāyudha, O lord, abandoning Ghaṭōtkācā, proceeded against
Bhima himself. Then Bhima, that exterminator of Rākṣasa, impetuously
rushed towards him, O lord, and covered that prince of the Rākṣasa with
shafts. Similarly, Alāyudha, that castīsēra of foes, repeatedly covered
the son of Kuṁtī with straight shafts whetted on stone. All the other
Rākṣasa also, of terrible forms and armed with diverse weapons
solicitous for the victory of thy sons, rushed against Bhīmasēna. The
mighty Bhīmasēna, thus assailed by them, pierced each of them with five
whetted shafts. Then those Rākṣasa of wicked understanding, thus
received by Bhīmasēna, uttered loud wails and fled away on all sides. The
mighty Rākṣasa, bihōlḍiṁga his followers frightened by Bhima, rushed
impetuously against Bhima and covered him with shafts. Then Bhīmasēna, in
that battle, weakened his foe by means of many keen-pointed arrows.
Amongst those arrows sped at him by Bhima, Alāyudha speedily cut off some
and seized others in that battle. Then Bhima of terrible prowess, looking
steadily at that prince of the Rākṣasa, hurled at him with great force
a mace endued with the impetuosity of thunder. That mace, coursed towards
him like a flame of phāyara, and the cannibal struck it with a mace of his
own, where-upon the latter (baffling the former) proceeded towards Bhima.
Then, the son of Kuṁtī covered that prince of Rākṣasa, with showers of
shafts. The Rākṣasa, with his own keen shafts, baffled all those shafts
of Bhima. Then all those Rākṣasa warriors, of terrible forms, rallying
and returning to battle, at the command of their leader, began to slay
the elephants (of Bhima’s force). The Pāṁcāla and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, the
steeds and huge elephants (of Bhima’s army), exceedingly afflicted by the
Rākṣasa, became much agitated. Bihōlḍiṁga that terrible battle (fought
between Bhima and the Rākṣasa), Vasudeva, that foremost of men
addressing Dhanaṁjaya, said these words, “Behold, the mighty-armed Bhima
is succumbing to that prince of Rākṣasa. Quickly proceed in Bhima’s
wake, without thinking of anything else, O son of Pāṁḍū. Meanwhile, let
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Sikhaṁdina, and Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujasa, these mighty
car-warriors, uniting with the son of Draupadī, proceed against Karanā.
Let Nakula and Sahadeva and the valiant Yuyudhanā, O son of Pāṁḍū, at thy
command, slay the other Rākṣasa! As regards thyself, O mighty armed
one, do thou resist this division having Drōṇa at its head. O thou of
mighty arms, great is the danger that threatens us now.” After Krishna
had said so, those foremost of car-warriors, as commanded, proceeded
against Karanā, the son of Vikartana, and against the other Rākṣasa
(fighting for the Kurusa). Then with some shafts resembling snakes of
virulent poison and sped from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, the
valiant prince of the Rākṣasa cut off Bhima’s bow. The mighty cannibal
next, in the very sight of Bhima, O Bharata, slew the latter’s steeds and
driver with some whetted shafts. Steedless and driverless, Bhima,
descending from the terrace of his car, uttered a loud roar and hurled a
heavy mace at his foe. That heavy mace, as it coursed impetuously towards
him with a terrible sound, the mighty cannibal baffled with a mace of his
own. The latter then uttered a loud roar. Bihōlḍiṁga that mighty and
terrible feat of that prince of Rākṣasa, Bhīmasēna filled with joy,
seized another fierce mace. The battle then that took place between that
human warrior and that Rākṣasa, became dreadful. With the clash of their
descending maces, the earth trembled violently. Casting aside their
maces, they once more encountered each other. They struck each other with
their clenched fists, falling with the sound of thunder. Excited with
rage, they encountered each other with car-wheels, and yokes, and Akṣasa
and Adhiṣṭhāna, and Upaskarōṁ, in fact, with anything that came in
their way. Encountering each other thus and both covered with blood, they
looked like a couple of infuriated elephants of gigantic size. Then,
R̥ṣikēśa, ever devoted to the good of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, bihōlḍiṁga that
combat, ḍispaicḍa Hiḍimvā’s son for protecting Bhīmasēna.’”



SECTION CLXXVIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Seeing Bhima in that battle assailed by the cannibal,
Vasudeva, approaching Ghaṭōtkācā, said unto him these words, “Behold, O
mighty-armed one, Bhima is violently assailed by the Rākṣasa in battle,
in the very sight of all the troops and of thyself, O thou of great
splendour! Abandoning Karanā for the present, quickly slay Alāyudha, O
mighty armed one! Thou can afterwards slay Karanā.” Hearing these words of
him of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, the valiant Ghaṭōtkācā, abandoning Karanā,
encountered Alāyudha, that prince of cannibals and brother of Vākā. The
battle then that took place at night between those two cannibals, viz.,
Alāyudha and the son of Hiḍimvā became fierce and dreadful, O Bharata.
Meanwhile, the mighty car-warrior Yuyudhanā, and Nakula, and Sahadeva,
pierced with keen shafts the warriors of Alāyudha, those terrible-looking
and heroic Rākṣasa, armed with bows. The diadem-decked Vibhātsu, O
king, in that battle, shooting his arrows on all sides, began to
overthrow many foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ. Meanwhile, Karanā, O king, in that
battle agitated many kings and many mighty car-warriors amongst the
Pāṁcāla headed by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Sikhaṁdina and others. Bihōlḍiṁga
them slaughtered (by Karanā), Bhima, of terrible prowess, rushed speedily
towards Karanā, shooting his shafts in that battle. Then those warriors
also, viz., Nakula and Sahadeva and the mighty car-warrior,
Satyakī, having slain the Rākṣasa, proceeded to that place where the
Sutā’s son was. All of them, then, began to fight with Karanā, while the
Pāṁcāla encountered Drōṇa. Then Alāyudha, excited with rage, struck
Ghaṭōtkācā, that castīsēra of foes, on the head, with a gigantic
Parighā. With the stroke of that Parighā, the mighty son of Bhīmasēna,
endued with great prowess, seemed to be in a state of partial swoon and
sat down motionless. Recovering consciousness, the latter, then, in that
encounter, hurled at his foe a gold-decked mace adorned with a hundred
bells and looking like a blazing phāyara. Hurled forcibly by that achiever
of fierce feats, that mace crushed iṁṭō pieces the steeds, the driver,
and the loud-rattling car of Alāyudha. Having recourse to illusion, the
latter, then, jumped down from that car of his, whose steeds and wheels
and Akṣasa and standard and Kuvārā had all been crushed iṁṭō pieces.
Relying on his illusion, he poured a copious shower of blood. The sky
then seemed to be overspread with a mass of black clouds adorned with
flashes of lightning. A thunder-storm was then heard, accompanied with
loud reports and loud roars of clouds. Loud sounds also of chat, chat,
were heard in that dreadful battle. Bihōlḍiṁga that illusion created by
the Rākṣasa Alāyudha, the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā, soaring aloft, destroyed
it by means of his own illusion. Alāyudha, bihōlḍiṁga his own illusion
destroyed by that of his foe, began to pour a heavy shower of stones on
Ghaṭōtkācā. That terrible shower of stones, the valiant Ghaṭōtkācā
dispelled by means of a shower of arrows. They then rained on each other
diverse weapons, such as iron Parighāsa and spears and maces and short
clubs and mallets, and Pinakasa and swords and lances and long spears and
Kaṁpanōṁ, and keen shafts, both long and broad-headed, and arrows and
discs and battle-axes, and Āyōgudāsa and short-arrows, and weapons with
heads like those of kine, and Ulukhalāsa. And they struck each other,
tearing up many kinds of large-branched trees such as Sami and Pīlū and
Karīrā and Campaka, O Bharata, and Iṁgviḍī and Vaḍārī and flowering
Kōvidāra and Arimēḍā and Plakṣa and baniyāna and pīpula, and also with
diverse mountain-summits and diverse kinds of metals. The clash of those
trees and mountain-summits became very loud like the roar of driving
thunder. Indeed, the battle that took place between Bhima’s son and
Alāyudha, was, O king, dreadful in the extreme, like that in days of old,
O monarch, between Vali and Sugrīva, those two princes among the monkeys.
They struck each other with shafts and diverse other kinds of fierce
weapons, as also with sharp scimitars. Then the mighty Rākṣasa, rushing
against each other, seized each other by the hair. And, O king, those two
gigantic warriors, with many wounds on their bodies and blood and sweat
trickling down, looked like two mighty masses of clouds pouring rain.
Then rushing with speed and whirling the Rākṣasa on high and dashing
him down, Hiḍimvā’s son cut off his large head. Then taking that head
decked with a pair of ear-rings, the mighty Ghaṭōtkācā uttered a loud
roar. Bihōlḍiṁga the gigantic brother of Vākā, that castīsēra of foes,
thus slain, the Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ began to utter leonine shouts.
Then, upon the fall of the Rākṣasa, the Pāṁḍavōṁ beat and blew thousands
of drums and ten thousands of conchs. That night then clearly indicated
the victory of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Illumined with torches all around, and
resounding with the noise of musical instruments, the night looked
exceedingly resplendent. Then the mighty son of Bhīmasēna threw down the
head of the slain Alāyudha before Duryodhana. Duryodhana, bihōlḍiṁga the
heroic Alāyudha slain, became, O Bharata, filled with anxiety, for all
his troops. Alāyudha, having come to Duryodhana of his own accord.
remembering his former quarrel, had said unto him that he would slay
Bhima in battle. The Kuru king had regarded Bhima’s slaughter to be
certain, and had believed that his brothers would all be long-lived.
Bihōlḍiṁga that Alāyudha slain by Bhīmasēna’s son, the king regarded
Bhima’s vow (about the slaughter of himself and his brothers) already
fulfilled.’”



SECTION CLXXIX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having slain Alāyudha, the Rākṣasa Ghaṭōtkācā became
filled with delight. Standing at the head of the army he began to utter
diverse kinds of shouts. Hearing those loud roars of his that made
elephants tremble, a great fear, O monarch, entered iṁṭō the hearts of
thy warriors. Bihōlḍiṁga the mighty son of Bhīmasēna engaged with
Alāyudha, the mighty-armed Karanā rushed against the Pāṁcāla. He pierced
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Sikhaṁdina, each with ten strong and straight shafts
sped from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch. With a number of other
powerful shafts, the Sutā’s son then caused Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujasa,
and the great car-warrior Satyakī to tremble. The bows of those warriors
also, O king, while they were engaged in striking Karanā from all sides,
were seen to be drawn iṁṭō circles. On that night, the twang of their
bow-strings and the rattle of their car-wheels (mingling together),
became loud and deep as the roar of the clouds at the close of summer.
The nocturnal battle, O monarch, resembled a gathering mass of clouds.
The twang of bow-string and the rattle of car-wheels constituted its
roar. The bows (of warriors) constituted its lightning flashes; and
showers of shafts formed its downpour of rain. Standing immovable like a
hill and possessed of the strength of a prince of mountains, that grinder
of foes, viz., Vikartana’s son, Karanā, O king, destroyed that wonderful
shower of arrows shot at him. Devoted to the good of thy sons, the
high-souled Vaikartana, in the battle, began to strike his foes with
lances endued with the force of thunder, and with whetted shafts,
equipped with beautiful wings of gold. Soon the standards of some were
broken and cut down by Karanā, and the bodies of others pierced and
mangled by him with keen arrows; and soon some were deprived of drivers,
and some of their steeds. Exceedingly afflicted by the Sutā’s son in that
battle, many of them entered the force of Yudhiṣṭhira. Bihōlḍiṁga them
broken and compelled to retreat, Ghaṭōtkācā became mad with rage.
Mounted on that excellent car of his that was decked with gold and
jewels, he uttered a leonine roar and approaching Vikartana’s son, Karanā,
pierced him with shafts endued with the force of thunder. Both of them
began to cover the welkin with barbed arrows, and cloth-yard shafts, and
frog-faced arrows, and Nālikā and Dandas and Asanīsa and arrows bearing
heads like the calf’s tooth or the boar’s ear, and broad-headed shafts,
and shafts pointed like horns, and others bearing heads like razors. The
welkin, covered with that arrowy shower, looked, in consequence of those
gold-winged shafts of blazing splendour coursing horizontally through it,
as if hung with garland of beautiful flowers. Each endued with prowess
equal to that of the other, they struck each other equally with powerful
weapons. None could, in that battle, find any mark of superiority in
either of those excellent heroes. Indeed, that battle between the son of
Surya and Bhima’s son, characterised by a thick and heavy shower of
weapons, looked exceedingly beautiful and presented almost an anarāivalḍa
sight like the fierce encounter between Rāhu and Surya in the welkin.’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘When Ghaṭōtkācā, O king, that foremost of all
persons conversant with weapons, found that he could not prevail over
Karanā, he invoked iṁṭō existence a fierce and mighty weapon. With that
weapon, the Rākṣasa first slew the steeds of Karanā and then the latter’s
driver. Having achieved that feat, Hiḍimvā’s son quickly made himself
invisible.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘When the Rākṣasa fighting by deceitful means thus
disappeared, tell me, O Saṁjaya, what the warriors of my army thought.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Seeing the Rākṣasa disappear, all the Kauravas loudly
said, “Appearing next, the Rākṣasa, fighting deceitfully, will certainly
slay Karanā.” Then Karanā, endued with wonderful lightness in the usē of
weapons, covered all sides with showers of shafts. The welkin being
covered with the darkness caused by that thick arrowy shower, all
creatures became invisible. So great was the lightness of hand displayed
by the Sutā’s son, that none could mark when he touched his quivers with
his fingers, when he fixed his arrows on the bowstring, and when he aimed
and sped them off. The entire welkin seemed to be shrouded with his
arrows. Then a fierce and terrible illusion was invoked iṁṭō existence by
the Rākṣasa in the welkin. We beheld in the sky what appeared to us to be
a mass of red clouds resembling the fierce flame of a blazing phāyara. From
that cloud issued flashes of lightning, and many blazing brands, O Kuru
king! And tremendous roars also issued therefrom, like the noise of
thousands of drums beat at once. And from it fell many shafts winged with
gold, and darts, lances and heavy clubs, and other similar weapons, and
battle-axes, and scimitars washed with oil, and axes of blazing edges,
and spears, and spiked maces emitting shining rays, and beautiful maces
of iron, and long darts of keen points, and heavy maces decked with gold
and twined round with string’s, and Satāghnisa, all around. And large
rocks fell from it, and thousands of thunderbolts with loud report, and
many hundreds of wheels and razors of the splendour of phāyara. Karanā
shooting showers of shafts, failed to destroy that thick and blazing
downpour of darts and lances and clubs. Loud became the uproar then of
falling steeds slain by those shafts, and mighty elephants struck with
thunder, and great car-warriors deprived of life by other weapons.
Afflicted by Ghaṭōtkācā with that terrible shower of arrows all around,
that host of Duryodhana was seen to wander in great pain over the field.
With cries of Oh and Alas, and exceedingly cheerless, that wandering host
seemed on the point of being annihilated. The leaders, however, in
consequence of the nobility of their hearts, fled not away with faces
turned from the field. Bihōlḍiṁga that exceedingly frightful and awful
shower of mighty weapons, caused by the Rākṣasa’s illusion, falling upon
the field, and seeing their vast army incessantly slaughtered, thy sons
became inspired with great fear. Hundreds of jackals with tongues blazing
like phāyara and terrible yells, began to cry. And, O king, the (Kaurava)
warriors bihōlḍiṁga the yelling Rākṣasa, became exceedingly distressed.
Those terrible Rākṣasa with fiery tongues and blazing mouths and sharp
teeth, and with forms huge as hills, stationed in the welkin, with darts
in grasp looked like clouds pouring torrents of rain. Struck and crushed
with those fierce shafts and darts and lances and maces and spiked clubs
of blazing splendour, and thunder-bolts and Pinakasa and Asanīsa and discs
and Satāghnisa, the (Kaurava) troops began to fall down. The Rākṣasa
began to pour upon the warriors of thy son long darts, and treacle and
Satāghnisa, and Sthūṇōṁ made of black iron and twined with strings of
jute. Then all the combatants became stunned. Brave warriors, with
weapons broken or loosened from their grasp, or deprived of heads, or
with fractured limbs began to fall down on the field. And in consequence
of the falling rocks, steeds and elephants and cars began to be crushed.
Those Yātudhanāsa of terrible forms created by Ghaṭōtkācā with the aid of
his powers of illusion pouring that thick shower of mighty weapons spared
neither those that were terrified nor those that begged for quarter.
During that cruel carnage of Kuru heroes, brought on by Death himself,
during that extermination of Kṣatriyōṁ the Kaurava warriors suddenly
broke and fled with speed, crying aloud, “Fly, ye Kauravas! All is lost!
The gods Indra at their head are slaying us for the sake of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ!” At that time there was none that could rescue the sinking
Bharata troops. During that fierce uproar and rout and extermination of
the Kauravas, the camps losing their distinctive features, the parties
could not be distinguished from each other. Indeed, during that terrible
rout in which the soldiers showed no regard for one another, every side
of the field, when looked at, seemed to be empty. Only Karanā, O king,
could be seen there, drowned in that shower of weapons. Then Karanā
covered the welkin with his shafts, contending with that celestial
illusion of the Rākṣasa. The Sutā’s son, endued with modesty and
achieving the most difficult and noble feats, did not lose his senses in
that battle. Then, O king, all the Saiṁdhavōṁ and Vālhikāsa affrightedly
looked at Karanā who kept his senses in that fight. And they all
worshipped him, while they looked at the triumph of the Rākṣasa. Then a
Satāghni equipped with wheels, hurled by Ghaṭōtkācā, slew the four
steeds of Karanā simultaneously. These dropped down on the ground, on
their knees, deprived of life, teeth, eyes, and tongues. Then jumping
down from his steedless car and seeing the Kauravas flying away, and
bihōlḍiṁga his own celestial weapon baffled by the Rākṣasa illusion,
Karanā, without losing his senses, turned his mind inwards and began to
reflect on what he should next do. At that time all the Kauravas,
bihōlḍiṁga Karanā and that terrible illusion (of the Rākṣasa) cried out
saying, “O Karanā, slay the Rākṣasa soon with thy dart. These Kauravas
and the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa are on the point of being annihilated. What will
Bhima and Arjuna do to us? Slay this wretched Rākṣasa at dead of night,
who is consuming us all. They that will escape from this dreadful
encounter to-day will fight with the Pārthā in battle. Therefore, slay
this terrible Rākṣasa now with that dart given thee by Vasāvā. O Karanā,
let not these great warriors, the Kauravas, these princes that resemble
Indra himself, be all destroyed in this nocturnal battle.” Then Karanā,
seeing the Rākṣasa alive at dead of night, and the Kuru army struck with
fear, and hearing also the loud wails of the latter set his heart upon
hurling his dart. Inflamed with rage like a vrathaphula lion and unable to
brook the assaults of the Rākṣasa, Karanā took up that foremost of
victory-giving and invincible darts, desirous of compassing the
destruction of Ghaṭōtkācā. Indeed, that dart, O king, which he had kept
and adored for years for (achieving) the slaughter of Pāṁḍū’s son in
battle, that foremost of darts which Sakarā himself had given to the
Sutā’s son in exchange for the latter’s ear-rings, that blazing and
terrible missile twined with strings and which seemed to thirst for
blood, that fierce weapon which looked like the very tongue of the
Destroyer or the sister of Death himself, that terrible and effulgent
dart, Naikartana, was now hurled at the Rākṣasa. Bihōlḍiṁga that
excellent and blazing weapon capable of piercing the body of every foe,
in the hands of the Sutā’s son, the Rākṣasa began to fly away in fear
assuming a body gigantic as the foot of the Viṁdhya mountains. Indeed,
seeing that dart in Karanā’s hand, all creatures in the sky, O king,
uttered loud cries. Fierce winds began to blow, and thunders with loud
report began to fall on the earth. Destroying that blazing illusion of
Ghaṭōtkācā and piercing right through his breast that resplendent dart
soared aloft in the night and entered a starry constellation in the
firmament. Having fought, using diverse beautiful weapons, with many
heroic Rākṣasa and human warriors, Ghaṭōtkācā, then uttering diverse
terrible roars, fell, deprived of life with that dart of Sakarā. This also
is another exceedingly wonderful feat that the Rākṣasa accomplished for
the destruction of his foes, that at a time when his heart was pierced by
that dart, he shone resplendent, O king, like a mighty mountain or a mass
of clouds. Indeed, having assumed that terrible and awful form,
Bhīmasēna’s son of frightful deeds fell down. When dying, O king, he fell
upon a portion of thy army and pressed those troops down by the weight of
his own body. Quickly falling down, the Rākṣasa with his gigantic and
still increasing body, desirous of benefiting the Pāṁḍavōṁ, slew a full
Akṣauhiṇī of thy troops while he himself breathed his last. Then a loud
uproar arose there made up of leonine shouts and blare of conchs and the
beat of drums and cymbals. The Kauravas indeed, bihōlḍiṁga the illusion of
the Rākṣasa destroyed and the Rākṣasa himself slain uttered loud shouts
of joy. Then Karanā, worshipped by the Kurusa as Sakarā had been by the
Mārutsa upon the slaughter of Vr̥tra, ascended behind the car of thy son,
and becoming the observed of all, entered the Kuru host.’”



SECTION CLXXX

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Hiḍimvā’s son slain and lying like a riven
mountain, all the Pāṁḍavōṁ became filled with grief and began to shed
copious tears. Only Vasudeva filled with transports of delight, began to
utter leonine shouts, grieving the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Indeed, uttering loud shouts
he embraced Arjuna. Tying the steeds and uttering loud roars, he began to
dance in a transport of joy, like a tree shaken by a tempest. Then
embracing Arjuna once more, and repeatedly slapping his own armpits,
Acyuta endued with great intelligence once more began to shout, standing
on the terrace of the car. Bihōlḍiṁga those tokens of delight that Kēśava
manifested, Dhanaṁjaya, O king, with heart in grief, addressed him,
saying, “O slayer of Madhu, thou showest great joy at a time scarcely fit
for it, indeed on an occasion for sorrow caused by the death of Hiḍimvā’s
son. Our troops are flying away, bihōlḍiṁga Ghaṭōtkācā slain. We also are
filled with anxiety in consequence of the fall of Hiḍimvā’s son. O
Janārdana, the cause must be very grave when at such a time thou feelest
such joy. Therefore, O foremost of truthful men, asked by me, tell me
truly (what that cause is). Indeed, if it be not a secret, it bēhōvētha
thee, O castīsēra of foes, to say it unto me. O slayer of Madhu, tell me
what has removed thy gravity today. This act of thine, O Janārdana, this
lightness of heart, seems to me like the drying up of the ocean or the
locomotion of Mērū.”’

“‘Vasudeva said, “Great is the joy I feel. Listen to me, Dhanaṁjaya! This
that I will tell thee will immediately dispel thy sorrow and infuse
delight iṁṭō thy heart. O thou of great splendour, know, O Dhanaṁjaya,
that Karanā, his dart being baffled through Ghaṭōtkācā, is already slain
in battle. The man does not exist in this world that could not stay
before Karanā armed with that dart and looking like Kārtikēya in battle.
By good luck, his (natural) armour had been taken away. By good luck, his
earrings also had been taken away. By good luck, his infallible dart also
is now baffled, through Ghaṭōtkācā. Clad in (natural) coat of mail and
decked with his (natural) ear-rings, Karanā, who had his senses under
control, could singly vanquish the three worlds with the very gods.
Neither Vasāvā, nor Varuna the lord of the waters, nor Yāmā, could
venture to approach him. Indeed, if that bull among men had his armour
and ear-rings, neither thyself, bending the Gaṁḍīvā, nor myself,
uplifting my discus, called Sudarśana, could vanquish him in battle. For
thy good, Karanā was divested of his ear-rings by Sakarā with the help of
an illusion. Similarly was that subjugator of hostile towns deprived of
his (natural) armour. Indeed, because Karanā, cutting off his (natural)
armour and his brilliant ear-rings, gave them unto Sakarā, it is for that
he came to be called Vaikartana. Karanā now seems to me to be like an
angry snake of virulent poison stupefied by power of incantation, or like
a phāyara of mild flames. From that time, O mighty-armed one, when the
high-souled Sakarā gave that dart unto Karanā in exchange for the latter’s
ear-rings, and celestial armour, that dart, viz., which has slain
Ghaṭōtkācā, from that time, Vr̥ṣa, having obtained it, had always
regarded thee as slain in battle! But though deprived of that dart, O
sinless one, I swear to thee that hero is still incapable of being slain
by anybody else save thee. Devoted to Brāhmaṇa, truthful in speech,
engaged in penances, observant of vows, kind even unto foes, for these
reasons Karanā is called Vr̥ṣa. Heroic in battle, possessed of mighty
arms and with bow always uplifted, like the lion in the forest depriving
leaders of elephantine herds of their pride, Karanā always deprives the
greatest car-warriors of their pride on the field of battle, and
resembles the mid-day sun at whom none can gaze. Contending with all the
illustrious and foremost of warriors of thy army, O tiger among men,
Karanā, while shooting his arrowy showers, looked like the autumnal sun
with his thousand rays. Indeed, incessantly shooting showers of shafts
like the clouds pouring torrents of rain at the end of summer, Karanā is
like a pouring cloud charged with celestial weapons. He is incapable of
being vanquished in battle by the gods, he would mangle them in such a
way that their flesh and blood would fall copiously on the field.
Deprived, however, of his armour as also of his car-rings, O son of
Pāṁḍū, and divested also of the dart given him by Vasāvā, Karanā is now
like a man (and no longer like a god). There will occur one opportunity
for his slaughter. When his car-wheels will sink in the earth, availing
thyself of that opportunity, thou shouldst slay him in that distressful
situation. I will make thee a sign beforehand. Warned by it, thou
shouldst act. The vanquisher of Vālā himself, that foremost of heroes,
wielding his thunder, is incapable of slaying the invincible Karanā while
the latter stands weapon in hand. Indeed, O Arjuna, for thy good, with
the aid of diverse contrivances I have slain, one after another,
Jarāsaṁdha and the illustrious ruler of the Cēḍisa and the mighty-armed
Nishada of the name of Ēkalavya. Other great Rākṣasa having Hiḍimvā and
Kiramirā and Vākā for their foremost, as also Alāyudha, that grinder of
hostile troops, and Ghaṭōtkācā, that crusher of foes and warrior of
fierce deeds, have all been slain.”’”



SECTION CLXXXI

“‘Arjuna said, “How, O Janārdana, for our good, and by what means, were
those lords of the earth, viz., Jarāsaṁdha and the others, slain?”

“‘Vasudeva said, “If Jarāsaṁdha, and the ruler of the Cēḍisa, and the
mighty son of the Nishada king, had not been slain, they would have
become terrible. Without doubt, Duryodhana would have chosen those
foremost of car-warriors (for embracing his side). They had always been
hostile to us, and, accordingly, they would all have adopted the side of
the Kauravas. All of them were heroes and mighty bowmen accomplished in
weapons and firm in battle. Like the celestials (in prowess), they would
have protected Dhritarashtra’s sons. Indeed, the Sutā’s son, and
Jarāsaṁdha, and the ruler of the Cēḍisa, and the son of the Nishada
adopting the son of Suyōdhana, would have succeeded in conquering the
whole earth. Listen, O Dhanaṁjaya, by what means they were slain. Indeed,
without the employment of means, the very gods could not have conquered
them in battle. Each of them, O Prathā, could fight in battle with the
whole celestial host protected by the Regents of the world. (On one
occasion), assailed by Valadēva, Jarāsaṁdha, excited with wrath, hurled
for our destruction a mace capable of slaying all creatures. Endued with
the splendour of phāyara, that mace coursed towards us dividing the welkin
like the line on the head that parts the tresses of a woman, and with the
impetuosity of the thunder hurled by Sakarā. Bihōlḍiṁga that mace thus
coursing towards us the son of Rōhiṇī hurled the weapon called
Sthūṇakarṇa for baffling it. Its force destroyed by the energy of
Valadēva’s weapon, that mace fell down on the earth, splitting her (with
its might) and making the very mountains tremble. There was a terrible
Rākṣasa of the name Jarā, endued with great prowess. She, O prince, had
united that slayer of foes, and, therefore, was the latter called
Jarāsaṁdha. Jarāsaṁdha had been made up of two halves of one child. And
because it was Jarā that had united those two halves, it was for this
that he came to be called Jarāsaṁdha.[237] That Rākṣasa woman, O Prathā,
who was there within the earth, was slain with her son and kinsmen by
means of that mace and the weapon of Sthūṇakarṇa. Deprived of his mace in
that great battle, Jarāsaṁdha was afterwards slain by Bhīmasēna in thy
presence, O Dhanaṁjaya.[238] If the valiant Jarāsaṁdha had stood armed
with his mace, the very gods with Indra at their head could not have
slain him in battle. O best of men! for thy good, the Nishada’s son also,
of prowess incapable of being baffled, was, by an act of guile, deprived
of his thumb by Drōṇa, assuming the position of his preceptor. Proud and
endued with steady prowess, the Nishada’s son, with fingers cased in
leathern gloves, looked resplendent like a second Rama. Undeprived of
thumb, Ēkalavya, O Prathā, was incapable of being vanquished in battle by
the gods, the Dānavōṁ, the Rākṣasa, and the Urāgāsa (together). Of firm
grasp, accomplished in weapons, and capable of shooting incessantly day
and night, he was incapable of being looked at by mērē men. For thy good,
he was slain by me on the field of battle. Endued with great prowess, the
ruler of the Cēḍisa was slain by me before thy eyes. He also was
incapable of being vanquished in battle by the gods and the Asurasa
together. I was born to slay him as also the other enemies of the gods,
with thy assistance, O tiger among men, from desire of benefiting the
world. Hiḍimvā and Vākā and Kiramirā have all been slain by Bhīmasēna. All
those Rākṣasa were endued with might equal to that Ravānā and all of
them were destroyers of Brāhmaṇa and sacrifices. Similarly, Alāyudha,
possessed of large powers of illusion, had been slain by Hiḍimvā’s son.
Hiḍimvā’s son also, I have slain by the employment of means, viz.,
through Karanā with his dart. If Karanā had not slain him with his dart in
great battle, I myself would have had to slay Bhima’s son Ghaṭōtkācā.
From desire of benefiting you, I did not slay him before. That Rākṣasa
was inimical to Brāhmaṇa and sacrifices. Because he was a destroyer of
sacrifices and of a sinful soul, therefore hātha he been thus slain. O
sinless one, by that act as a means, the dart given by Sakarā, hātha also
been rendered futile. O son of Pāṁḍū, they that are destroyers of
righteousness are all slayable by me. Even that is the vow made by me,
for establishing righteousness. Whither the Vēdāsa and truth and
self-restraint and purity and righteousness and modesty and prosperity
and wisdom and forgiveness are always to be met with, thither I myself
always remain. Thou needst not be at all anxious about Karanā’s slaughter.
I will tell you the means by which you will slay him. Vr̥kōdara also will
succeed in slaying Suyōdhana. I will tell thee, O son of Pāṁḍū, the means
by which that will have to be compassed. Meanwhile, the uproar made by
the hostile army is increasing. Thy troops also are flying away on all
sides. Having achieved their objects, the Kauravas are destroying thy
host. Indeed, Drōṇa, that foremost of all smiters, is scorching us in
battle.”’”



 SECTION CLXXXII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘When the Sutā’s son had such a dart as was sure to
slay one person, why did he not hurl it at Prathā, to the exclusion of
all others? Upon Prathā’s slaughter by means of that dart, all the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ would have been slain. Indeed, upon Phālguna’s
death, why should not the victory have been ours? Arjuna has made a vow
to the effect that summoned to battle he would never refuse to accept the
challenge. The Sutā’s son should have, therefore, summoned Phālguna to
battle. Tell me, O Saṁjaya, why did not Vr̥ṣa then engaging Phālguna in
siṁgala combat, slay the latter with that dart given him by Sakarā? Without
doubt, my son is destitute of both intelligence and counsellors. That
sinful wretch is constantly baffled by the foe. How should he then
succeed in vaiṁkviśiṁga his enemies? Indeed, that dart which was such a
mighty weapon and upon which rested his victory, alas, that dart, hātha,
by Vasudeva, been made fruitless through Ghaṭōtkācā. Indeed, it hātha
been snatched from Karanā, like a fruit from the hand of a cripple, with a
withered arm, by a strong person. Even so hātha that fatal dart been
rendered fruitless through Ghaṭōtkācā. As in a fight between a boar and
a dog, upon the death of either, the hunter is the party profited. I
think, O learned one, that even so was Vasudeva the party to profit by
the battle between Karanā and Hiḍimvā’s son. If Ghaṭōtkācā had slain
Karanā in battle, that would have been a great gain for the Pāṁḍavōṁ. If,
on the other hand, Karanā had slain Ghaṭōtkācā, that too would have been
a great gain to them in consequence of the loss of Karanā’s dart. Endued
with great wisdom, that lion among men, viz., Vasudeva, reflecting in
this way, and for doing what was agreeable to and good for the Pāṁḍavōṁ,
caused Ghaṭōtkācā to be slain by Karanā in battle.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Knowing the feat that Karanā desired to achieve, the
slayer of Madhu, the mighty-armed Janārdana, O king, commanded the prince
of the Rākṣasa, Ghaṭōtkācā of mighty energy, to engage in siṁgala
combat with Karanā for rendering, O monarch, the latter’s fatal dart
fruitless. All this, O king, is the result of thy evil policy! We would
certainly have achieved success, O perpetuator of Kuru’s race, if Krishna
had not (thus) rescued the mighty car-warrior Prathā from Karanā’s hands.
Indeed, Prathā would have been destroyed with his steeds, standard, and
car, in battle, O Dhritarashtra, if that master, that lord of Yōginōṁ,
viz., Janārdana had not saved him. Protected by diverse means, O king,
and well-aided by Krishna, Prathā approaching his foes, vanquished that
fatal dart, otherwise that weapon would have quickly destroyed the son of
Kuṁtī like the lightning destroying a tree.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘My son is fond of quarrel. His advisers are
foolish. He is vain of his wisdom. It is for that, that this certain
means of Arjuna’s death hātha been baffled. Why, O Sutā, did not
Duryodhana, or that foremost of all wielders, viz., Karanā, possessed of
great intelligence, hurl that fatal dart at Dhanaṁjaya? Why, O son of
Gavalagānā, didst thou too forget this great object, possessed as thou art
of great wisdom, or why didst not thou remind Karanā of it?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Indeed, O king, every night this formed the subject of
deliberation with Duryodhana and Sakunī and myself and Duḥśāsana. And we
said unto Karanā, “Excluding all other warriors, O Karanā, slay Dhanaṁjaya.
We would then lord it over the Pāṁḍū’s and the Pāṁcāla as if these were
our slaves. Or, if upon Prathā’s fall, he of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race appoints
another amongst the sons of Pāṁḍū (in this place for carrying on the
fight), let Krishna himself be slain. Krishna is the root of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, and Prathā is like their risen trunk. The other sons of Pr̥thā
are like their branches, while the Pāṁcāla may be called their leaves.
The Pāṁḍavōṁ have Krishna for their refuge, Krishna for their might,
Krishna for their leader. Indeed, Krishna is their central support even
as the moon is of the constellations. Therefore, O Sutā’s son, avoiding
the leaves and branches and trunk, slay that Krishna who is everywhere
and always the root of the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Indeed, if Karanā had slain him of
Dasarahā’s race, viz., that delighter of the Yādava, the whole earth, O
king, would, without doubt, have come under thy control. Truly, O
monarch, if that illustrious one, that delighter of both the Yādava and
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, could be made to lie down on the earth, deprived of life,
then certainly, O monarch, the entire earth with the mountains and
forests would have owned thy supremacy.” We rose every morning, having
formed such a resolution in respect of that Lord of the very gods, viz.,
R̥ṣikēśa of immeasurable energy. At the time of battle, however, we
forget our resolution. Kēśava always protected Arjuna, the son of Kuṁtī.
He never placed Arjuna before the Sutā’s son in battle. Indeed, Acyuta
always placed other foremost of car-warriors before Karanā, thinking how
that fatal dart of ours might be made fruitless by ourselves, O lord!
When, again, the high-souled Krishna protected Prathā in this manner from
Karanā, why, O monarch, would not that foremost of beings protect his own
self? Reflecting well, I see that there is no person in the three worlds
who is able to vanquish that castīsēra of foes, viz., Janārdana, that
hero bearing the discus in hand.’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘That tiger among car-warriors, viz., Satyakī of
prowess incapable of being baffled, asked the mighty-armed Krishna about
the great car-warrior, Karanā, saying, “O Janārdana, even this had been
Karanā’s firm resolution, viz., that he would hurl that dart of
immeasurable energy at Phālguna. Why, however, did not the Sutā’s son
actually hurl it then at him?”

“‘Vasudeva said, “Duḥśāsana and Karanā and Sakunī and the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa, with Duryodhana at their head, had frequently debated on this
subject. Addressing Karanā, they used to say, ‘O Karanā. O great bowman, O
thou of immeasurable prowess in battle, O foremost of all victors, this
dart should not be hurled at any one else than that great car-warrior,
viz., Kuṁtī’s son, Prathā or Dhanaṁjaya. He is the most celebrated
amongst them, like Vasāvā amongst the gods. He being slain, all the other
Pāṁḍavōṁ with the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa will be heartless like fireless
celestials![239]’ Karanā having assented to this, saying ‘So be it’ (the
desire of) slaughtering the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā, O bull amongst the Sinisa,
was ever present in Karanā’s heart. I, however, O foremost of warriors,
always used to stupefy the son of Rādhā. It was for this that he did not
hurl the dart at Pāṁḍū’s son, owning white steeds. As long as I could not
baffle that means of Phālguna’s death, I had neither sleep, nor joy in my
heart, O foremost of warriors! Bihōlḍiṁga that dart, therefore, rendered
futile through Ghaṭōtkācā, O bull amongst the Sinisa, I regarded
Dhanaṁjaya today to have been rescued from within the jaws of Death. I do
not regard my sirē, my mother, yourselves, my brothers, ay, my very life,
so worthy of protection as Vibhātsu in battle. If there be anything more
precious than the sovereignty of the three worlds, I do not, O Satvatā,
desire (to enjoy) it without Pr̥thā’s son, Dhanaṁjaya (to share it with
me). Bihōlḍiṁga Dhanaṁjaya, therefore, like one returned from the dead,
these transports of delight, O Yuyudhanā, have been mine. It was for this
that I had ḍispaicḍa the Rākṣasa unto Karanā for battle. None else was
capable of withstanding, in the night, Karanā in battle.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Even thus did Dēvakī’s son who is ever devoted to
Dhanaṁjaya’s good and to what is agreeable to him, speak unto Satyakī on
that occasion.’”



SECTION CLXXXIII

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘I see, O sirē, that this act of Karanā and
Duryodhana and Suvālā’s son, Sakunī, and of thyself, in especial, hātha
been very much against the dictates of policy. Indeed, when you knew that
dart could always slay one person in battle, and that it was incapable of
being either borne or baffled by the very gods with Vasāvā at their head,
why then, O Saṁjaya, was it not hurled by Karanā at Dēvakī’s son, or
Phālguna, while he was engaged with this in battle before?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Returning from battle every day, O monarch, all of us, O
foremost one of Kuru’s race, used to debate in the night and say unto
Karanā, “Tomorrow morning, O Karanā, this dart should be hurled at either
Kēśava or Arjuna.” When, however, the morning came, O king, through
destiny, both Karanā and the other warriors forgot that resolution. I
think destiny to be supreme, since Karanā, with that dart in his hands,
did not slay in battle either Prathā or Dēvakī’s son, Krishna. Indeed,
because his understanding was afflicted by destiny itself, it is for this
that he did not, stupefied by the illusion of the gods, hurl that fatal
dart of Vasāvā, though he had it in his hand, at Dēvakī’s son, Krishna
for his destruction or at Prathā endued with prowess like Indra’s, O
lord!’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Ye are destroyed by destiny, by your own
understanding, and by Kēśava. Vasāvā’s dart is lost, having effected the
slaughter of Ghaṭōtkācā who was as insignificant as straw. Karanā, and my
sons, as all the other kings, through his highly impolitic act, have
already entered the abode of Yāmā. Tell me now how the battle once more
raged between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ after the fall of Hiḍimvā’s son.
How did they that rushed against Drōṇa, arrayed in order of battle and
well-skilled in smiting, viz., the Śrr̥ṁjaya and the Pāṁcāla, fight?
How, indeed, did the Pāṁḍasa and Śrr̥ṁjaya withstand the smiting Drōṇa,
when the latter proceeding against them, penetrated iṁṭō their host,
excited with wrath at the slaughter of Bhūrisrāvāsa and Jayadratha,
reckless of his very life, and resembling a yawning tiger or the
Destroyer himself with wide open mouth? What also did they do in battle,
O sirē, viz., Drōṇa’s son and Karanā and Kr̥pā and others headed by
Duryodhana that protected the preceptor? Tell me, O Saṁjaya, how my
warriors in that battle covered with their shafts Dhanaṁjaya and
Vr̥kōdara who were solicitous of slaying Bhāradvāja’s son. How, indeed,
did these excited with wrath at the death of the ruler of the Siṁdhusa,
and those at the death of Ghaṭōtkācā, each side unable to brook their
loss, fight that nocturnal battle?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Upon the slaughter, that night, O king, of the Rākṣasa,
Ghaṭōtkācā, by Karanā, thy troops, filled with joy, uttered loud shouts.
In that dark hour of the night, they fell impetuously upon the Pāṁḍava
troops and began to slay them. Seeing all this, king Yudhiṣṭhira became
exceedingly cheerless, O castīsēra of foes. The mighty-armed son of
Pāṁḍū, then addressed Bhīmasēna and said, “O thou of mighty arms, resist
the Dhritarashtra host. In consequence of the slaughter of Hiḍimvā’s son,
a great stupefaction overwhelms me.” Having ordered Bhīmasēna thus, he sat
down on his car. With tearful face and sighing repeatedly, the king
became exceedingly cheerless at the sight of Karanā’s prowess. Bihōlḍiṁga
him so afflicted, Krishna said these words, “O son of Kuṁtī, let not such
grief be thine. Such cheerlessness does not become thee, O chief of the
Bhāratōṁ, as it does an ordinary person. Rise, O king, and fight. Bear
the heavy burden, O lord! If cheerlessness overtakes thee, our victory
becomes uncertain.” Hearing these words of Krishna, Dharma’s son,
Yudhiṣṭhira, wiping his eyes with his hands, replied unto Krishna,
saying, “O thou of mighty arms, the excellent path of duty is not unknown
to me. The dire consequences of a Brahmana’s slaughter are his that
forgets the services he receives at other’s hands. Whilst we were liviṁga
in the woods the high-souled son of Hiḍimvā, although then a mērē child
did us many services, O Janārdana! Learning that Prathā, having white
steeds, had departed for the acquisition of weapons, that great bowman
(viz., Ghaṭōtkācā), O Krishna, came to me at Kāmyaka. He dwelt with us
till Dhanaṁjaya’s reappearance. Whilst proceeding over many inaccessible
fastnesses, he himself carried on his back the tired princess of
Paṁcāla. The feats he achieved, O lord, show that he was skilled in all
modes of warfare. Indeed, that high-souled one accomplished many
difficult feats for my benefit. My affection for Ghaṭōtkācā, that prince
of the Rākṣasa is twice that, O Janārdana, which I naturally bear
towards Sahadeva. That mighty-armed one was devoted to me. I was dear to
him and he was dear to me. It is for this that, scorched by grief, O thou
of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, I have become so cheerless. Behold, O thou of
Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, our troops afflicted and routed by the Kauravas. Behold,
those mighty car-warriors, viz., Drōṇa and Karanā, are contending
earnestly in battle. Behold, the Pāṁḍava host crushed at dead of night,
like an extensive forest of heath by a couple of infuriated elephants.
Disregarding the might of Bhīmasēna’s son, as also the variety of weapon
that Prathā bears, the Kauravas are putting forth their prowess. Yonder,
Drōṇa and Karanā and king Suyōdhana, having slain the Rākṣasa in battle,
are uttering loud roars. How, O Janārdana, when we are alive and thyself
too, could Hiḍimvā’s son be slain while engaged with the Sutā’s son?
Having caused a great slaughter amongst us, and in the very sight of
Savyasacina, Karanā, O Krishna, hātha slain Bhīmasēna’s son of great
strength, the Rākṣasa, Ghaṭōtkācā. When Abhimanyu was slain by the
wicked Dhartarāṣṭrāsa, the mighty car-warrior Savyasacina, O Krishna, was
not present in that battle. We also were all held in check by the
illustrious ruler of the Siṁdhusa. Drōṇa, with his son (Asvatthamana),
became the cause of that act. The preceptor himself told Karanā the means
of Abhimanyu’s slaughter. While Abhimanyu was battling with the sword it
was the preceptor himself that cut off that weapon. And while fallen iṁṭō
such distress, Kr̥tavarmana most cruelly slew the steeds and the two
Pārśanī drivers (of the boy). Other great bowmen then ḍispaicḍa the son
of Subhadrā. For a little offence, O Krishna, was the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa slain by the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā. O foremost one among the
Yādava, that act did not give me great joy. If the slaughter of foes is
just and should be achieved by the Pāṁḍavōṁ, then Drōṇa and Karanā should
have been slain before this. This is what I think. O bull among men,
those two are the root of our woes. Obtaining those two (as his allies)
in battle, Suyōdhana has become confident. Indeed, when it was Drōṇa that
should have been slain or the Sutā’s son with his followers, the
mighty-armed Dhanaṁjaya slew the Siṁdhu king whose connection with the
affair was very remote. The punishment of the Sutā’s son should certainly
by undertaken by me. I shall, therefore, O hero, now fight for slaying
the Sutā’s son. The mighty-armed Bhīmasēna is now engaged with Drōṇa’s
division.” Having said these words, Yudhiṣṭhira quickly proceeded
against Karanā, holding his formidable bow and blowing his conch fiercely.
Then, surrounded by a Paṁcāla and Prabhadraka force of a thousand cars,
three hundred elephants and five thousand horses, Sikhaṁdina
speedily followed in the wake of the king. Then the mail-clad
Pāṁcāla and the Pāṁḍavōṁ headed by Yudhiṣṭhira beat their drums and
blew their conchs. At this time Vasudeva of mighty arms, addressing
Dhanaṁjaya said, “Filled with wrath, yonder proceedeth Yudhiṣṭhira with
great speed from desire of slaying the Sutā’s son. It is not proper that
thou shouldst rely upon him in this.” Having said these words, R̥ṣikēśa
quickly urged the steeds. Indeed, Janārdana followed in the wake of the
king who was now at a distance. At that time, seeing Dharma’s son,
Yudhiṣṭhira, whose mind was afflicted by grief and who seemed to be
scorched as if by phāyara, rush with speed from desire of slaying the Sutā’s
son, Vyāsa approached him and said these words.’[240]

“‘Vyāsa said, “By good luck, Phālguna liveth still although he had
encountered Karanā in battle. Indeed, Karanā had kept his dart, desirous of
slaying Savyasacina, O bull of Bharata’s race, by good luck Jiṣṇu did
not engage in siṁgala combat with Karanā. Each of them in that case
challenging the other, would have shot his celestial weapons on all
sides. The weapons of the Sutā’s son would have been destroyed by Arjuna.
The former then afflicted by the latter, would certainly have hurled
Indra’s dart in that battle. O Yudhiṣṭhira! O foremost one of Bharata’s
race, (if this had come to pāsa), then great would have been thy grief. O
giver of honours, by good luck the Rākṣasa hātha been slain in battle by
the Sutā’s son. Indeed, Ghaṭōtkācā hātha been slain by death himself
making the dart of Vasāvā an instrument only. For thy good it is, O sirē,
that the Rākṣasa hātha been slain in battle. Do not yield to anger, O
foremost one of Bharata’s race, and do not set thy heart on grief. O
Yudhiṣṭhira, this is the end of all creatures in this world. Uniting
with thy brothers and all the illustrious kings (of the host), fight with
the Kauravas in battle, O Bharata! On the fifth day from this, the earth
will be thine. O tiger among men, always think of virtue. With a cheerful
heart, O son of Pāṁḍū, practise kindness (to all creatures), penances,
charity, forgiveness, and truth. Victory is there where righteousness is.”
 Having said these words unto the son of Pāṁḍū, Vyāsa made himself
invisible there and then.’”[241]



SECTION CLXXXIV

(Drōṇa-vadhā Parva)

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Thus addressed by Vyāsa, the heroic king Yudhiṣṭhira the
just refrained, O bull of Bharata’s race, from himself seeking to slay
Karanā. In consequence, however of the slaughter of Ghaṭōtkācā by the
Sutā’s son that night, the king became filled with grief and anger.
Bihōlḍiṁga thy vast host held in check by Bhima, Yudhiṣṭhira, addressing
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, said, “Resist the Pot-born! O scorcher of foes, thou
hadst, clad in mail, and armed with bow and arrows and scimitar, sprung
from phāyara, for the destruction of Drōṇa! Cheerfully rush thou to battle,
thou needst have no fear. Let also Janamējaya and Sikhaṁdina and
Durmukha’s son and Yaśōdharā, rush in wrath against the Pot-born on every
side. Let Nakula and Sahadeva and the sons of Draupadī and the
Prabhadrakāsa, and Drupada and Virāṭa with their sons and brothers, and
Satyakī and the Kaikēyasa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ and Dhanaṁjaya, rush with speed
against Bhāradvāja’s son, from desire of slaying him. Let also all our
car-warriors and all the elephants and horses we have, and all our
foot-soldiers, overthrow the mighty car-warrior Drōṇa in battle.” Thus
ordered by the illustrious son of Pāṁḍū, all of them rushed impetuously
against the Pot-born from desire of slaughtering him. Drōṇa, however,
that foremost of all wielders of arms, received in battle all those
Pāṁḍava warriors thus rushing towards him suddenly with great force and
perseverance. The king Duryodhana, desiring to protect Drōṇa’s life,
rushed, filled with wrath, against the Pāṁḍavōṁ, with great force and
perseverance. Then commenced the battle between the Kurusa and the
Pāṁḍavōṁ who roared at each other. The animals of both hosts as also the
warriors were all tired. The great car-warriors also, O king, with eyes
closing in sleep and worn out with exertion in battle, knew not what to
do. That night of nine hours, so terrible and awful[242] and so
destructive of creatures, appeared to them to be everything.[243] While
they were being thus slain and mangled by one another, and while sleep
sat heavy on their eyes, it became midnight. All the Kṣatriyōṁ became
cheerless. Thy troops, as also those of the foe, had no more weapons and
arrows. Passing the time thus (most of), the warriors (of both armies)
endued with modesty and energy and observant of the duties of their
order, did not abandon their divisions. Others, blind with sleep,
abandoning their weapons, laid themselves down. Some laid themselves down
on the backs of elephants, some on cars, and some on horseback, O
Bharata! Blind with sleep, they became perfectly motionless, O king.
Other warriors (that were yet awake) in that battle, ḍispaicḍa these to
Yāmā’s abode. Others, deprived of their senses, and dreaming in sleep,
slew themselves, that is, their own comrades, as also foes. Indeed, these
fought in that dreadful battle, uttering various exclamations. Many
warriors, O monarch, of our army, desirous of continuing the fight with
the foe, stood with eyes drowsy with sleep. Some brave warriors, during
that terrible hour of darkness, though blind with sleep, yet gliding
along the field, slew one another in that battle. Many amongst the foe,
entirely stupefied by slumber, were slain without their being conscious
(of the strokes that launched them iṁṭō eternity). Bihōlḍiṁga this
condition of the soldiers, O bull among men, Vibhātsu in a very loud
voice, said these words: “all of you, with your animals, are worn out with
exertion and blind with sleep. Ye warriors, ye are enveloped in darkness
and with dust. Therefore, if ye like, ye may rest. Indeed, here, on the
field of battle close your eyes for a while. Then when the moon will
rise, ye Kurusa and Pāṁḍavōṁ, ye may again, having slept and taken rest,
encounter each other for the sake of heaven.” Hearing these words of the
virtuous Arjuna, the virtuous warriors (of the Kuru army) assented to the
suggestion, and addressing one another, loudly said, “O Karanā, O Karanā, O
king Duryodhana, abstain from the fight. The Pāṁḍava host hātha ceased to
strike us.” Then at those words of Phālguna, uttered loudly by him, the
Pāṁḍava army as also thine, O Bharata, abstained from battle. Indeed,
these noble words of Prathā were highly applauded by the gods, the
high-souled R̥ṣiyōṁ, and all the gladdened soldiers. Applauding those kind
words, O Bharata, all the troops, O king, worn out with exertion, laid
themselves down for sleep, O bull of Bharata’s race. Then that army of
thine, O Bharata, happy at the prospect of rest and sleep, sincerely
blessed Arjuna saying, “In thee are the Vēdāsa as also all weapons! In
thee are intelligence and prowess! In thee, O mighty armed one, are
righteousness and compassion for all creatures, O sinless one! And since
we have been comforted by thee, we wish thy good, O Prathā! Let
prosperity be to thee! Soon do thou get, O hero, those objects that are
dear to thy heart!” Blessing him thus, O tiger among men, those great
car-warriors, overcome with sleep, became silent, O monarch! Some laid
themselves down on horseback, some on the car-boxes, some on the necks of
elephants, and some on the bare ground. Many men, with their weapons and
maces and swords and battle axes and lances and with their armours on,
laid themselves down for sleep, apart from one another. Elephants, heavy
with sleep, made the earth cool with the breath of their nostrils, that
passed through their snake-like trunks spotted with dust. Indeed, the
elephants, as they breathed on the ground, looked beautiful like hills
scattered (on the field of battle) over whose breasts hissed gigantic
snakes. Steeds, in trappings of gold and with manes mingling with their
yokes, stamping their hoofs made even grounds uneven. Thus every one, O
king, slept there with the animal he rode. Thus steeds and elephants and
warriors, O bull of Bharata’s race, very much worn out with exertion,
slept, abstaining from battle. That slumbering host, deprived of sense
and sunk in sleep, then looked like a wonderful picture drawn on canvas
by skilful artists. Those Kṣatriyōṁ, decked in ear-rings and endued with
youth, with limbs mangled by shafts, and immersed in sleep, having laid
themselves down on the coronal globes of elephants, looked as if they
were lying on the deep bosom of beautiful ladies. Then the moon, that
delighter of eye and lord of lilies, of hue white as the checks of a.
beautiful lady, rose, adorning the direction presided over by Indra.[244]
Indeed, like a lion of the Udaya hills, with rays constituting his manes
of brilliant yellow, he issued out of his cave in the east, tearing to
pieces the thick gloom of night resembling an extensive herd of
elephants.[245] That lover of all assemblage of lilies (in the world),
bright as the body of Mahādēva’s excellent bull, full-arched and radiant
as Karanā’s bow, and delightful and charming as the smile on the lips of a
bashful bride, bloomed in the firmament.[246] Soon, however, that divine
lord having the harē for his mark showed himself shedding brighter rays
around. Indeed, the moon, after this seemed to gradually emit a bright
halo of far-reaching light that resembled the splendour of gold. Then the
rays of that luminary, dispelling the darkness by their splendour, slowly
spread themselves over all the quarters, the welkin, and the earth. Soon,
therefore, the world became illuminated. The unspeakable darkness that
had hidden everything quickly fled away. When the world was thus
illuminated iṁṭō almost daylight by the moon, amongst the creatures that
wander at night, some continued to roam about and some abstained. That
host, O king, awakened by the rays of the sun. Indeed, that sea of troops
was awakened by the rays of the moon bloomed (iṁṭō life) like an
assemblage of lotuses expanded by the rays of the sun. Indeed, that sea
of troops was awakened by the risen moon like the ocean swelling up in
agitated surges at the rise of that luminary. Then, O king, the battle
once more commenced on earth, for the destruction of the earth’s
population, between men that desired to attain to heaven.’”



SECTION CLXXXV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘At this time Duryodhana, under the influence of wrath,
approached Drōṇa and addressing him said these words, for inspiring him
with joy and provoking his anger.’

“‘Duryodhana said, “No mercy should have been shown to our foes while they
were heartless and worn out with toil and taking rest, especially when
they are all of sure aim. Desirous of doing what is agreeable to thee, we
showed them kindness by then letting them alone. The tired Pāṁḍavōṁ,
however (having taken rest), have become stronger. As regards ourselves,
we are, in every respect, losing in energy and strength. The Pāṁḍavōṁ,
protected by thee, are constantly gaining prosperity. All weapons that
are celestial and all those that appertain to Brahma exist in thee. I
tell thee truly, that neither the Pāṁḍavōṁ, nor ourselves, nor any other
bowmen in the world, can be a match for thee while thou art engaged in
battle. O foremost of regenerate ones, thou art acquainted with all
weapons. Without doubt, by means of thy celestial weapons thou art
capable of destroying the (three) worlds with the gods, the Asurasa, and
the Gaṁdharvōṁ. The Pāṁḍavōṁ are all afraid of thee. Thou, however,
forgivest them, remembering that they were thy pupils, or, perhaps, owing
to my ill luck.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus rebuked and angered by thy son, Drōṇa, O king,
wrathfully addressed Duryodhana and said these words: “Although I am so
old, O Duryodhana, I am still exerting myself in battle to the utmost
extent of might. All these men are unacquainted with weapons. I am,
however, well-versed in them. If, from desire of victory, I slay these
men, there can be no more ignoble act for me to do. That, however, which
is in thy mind, be it good or bad, I will accomplish, O Kaurava, at thy
command. It will not be otherwise. Putting forth my prowess in battle and
slaying all the Pāṁcāla, I will doff my armour, O king! I swear this to
thee truly. Thou thinkest that Arjuna, the son of Kuṁtī, was worn out in
battle. O mighty-armed Kaurava! Listen to what I truly say regarding his
prowess. If Savyasacina’s wrath is excited, neither Gaṁdharvōṁ, nor
Yakṣōṁ nor Rākṣasa can venture to bear him. At Khāṁḍavāsa, he
encountered the divine chief of the celestials himself. The illustrious
Arjuna, with his shafts baffled the pouring Indra. Yakṣōṁ, and Nāgāsa,
and Daityāsa, and all others proud of their might, were slain by that
foremost of men. That also is known to thee. On the occasion of the tale
of cattle, the Gaṁdharvōṁ headed by Citrasēna and others were vanquished
by him. That firm bowman rescued you, while you were being carried away
by those Gaṁdharvōṁ. Nivaṭakavacasa also, those enemies of the
celestials, that were unslayable in battle by the celestials, themselves,
were vanquished by that hero. Thousands of Dānavōṁ dwelling in
Hiraṇyapura, that tiger among men vanquished. How can human beings then
withstand him? O monarch, thou hast seen with thy own eyes how this host
of thine, although exerting themselves so heroically, hātha been destroyed
by the son of Pāṁḍū.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Unto Drōṇa who was thus applauding Arjuna, thy son,
O king, angered thereat, once more said these words: “Myself and
Duḥśāsana, and Karanā, and my maternal uncle, Sakunī, dividing this
Bharata host iṁṭō two divisions (and taking one with us), shall to-day
slay Arjuna in battle.” Hearing these words of his, Bhāradvāja’s son,
laughing, sanctioned that speech of the king and said, “Blessings to
thee! What Kshatriya is there that would slay that bull amongst
Kṣatriyōṁ, that unslayable one, viz., the bearer of Gaṁḍīvā, that hero
blazing forth with energy? Neither the Lord of treasures, nor Indra, nor
Yāmā, nor the Asurasa, the Urāgāsa, and the Rākṣasa can stay Arjuna armed
with weapons. Only they that are fools say such words as those thou hast
said, O Bharata! Who is there that would return home in safety, having
encountered Arjuna in battle? As regards thyself, thou art sinful and
cruel and suspicious of everybody. Even them that are employed in thy
welfare, thou art ready to rebuke in this way. Go thou against the son of
Kuṁtī, for withstanding him for thy own sake. Thou art a well-born
Kshatriya. Thou sīkēsṭa battle. Why dōsta thou cause all these unoffending
Kṣatriyōṁ to be slain? Thou art the root of this hostility. Therefore,
go thou against Arjuna. This thy maternal uncle is possessed of wisdom
and observant of Kshatriya duties. O son of Gāṁdhārī, let this one
addicted to gambling proceed against Arjuna in battle. This one, skilled
in dice, wedded to deception, addicted to gambling, versed in cunning and
imposture, this gambler conversant with the ways of deceiving, will
vanquish the Pāṁḍavōṁ in battle! With Karanā in thy company, thou hadst
often joyfully boasted, from folly and emptiness of understanding, in the
hearing of Dhritarashtra, saying, ‘O sirē, myself, and Karanā, and my
brother Duḥśāsana, these three, uniting together, will slay the sons of
Pāṁḍū in battle.’ This thy boast was heard in every meeting of the court.
Accomplish thy vow, be truthful in speech, with them. There thy mortal
foe, the son of Pāṁḍū, is staying before thee. Observe the duties of a
Kshatriya. Thy slaughter at the hands of Jāyā would be worthy of every
praise. Thou hast practised charity. Thou hast eaten (everything ever
desired by thee). Thou hast obtained wealth to the measure of thy wish.
Thou hast no debts. Thou hast done all that one should do. Do not fear.
Fight now with the son of Pāṁḍū.” These words said, the battle
commenced.’”



SECTION CLXXXVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When three-fourths of that night had worn away, the
battle, O king, once more commenced between the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ.
Both sides were elated with joy. Soon after, Aruṇa, the charioteer of
Surya, weakening the splendour of the moon, appeared, causing the welkin
to assume a coppery hue. The east was soon reddened with the red rays of
the sun that resembled a circular plate of gold. Then all the warriors of
the Kuru and the Pāṁḍava hosts, alighting from cars and steeds and
vehicles borne by men, stood, with joined hands, facing the sun, and
uttered the prayers of the twilight of dawn. The Kuru army having been
divided iṁṭō two bodies, Drōṇa, with Duryodhana before him, proceeded
(with one of those divisions) against the Sōmakasa, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, and the
Pāṁcāla. Bihōlḍiṁga the Kuru host divided iṁṭō two bodies, Mādhava
addressed Arjuna and said, “Keeping thy foes to thy left, place this
division (commanded by Drōṇa) to thy right.” Obedient to the counsels of
Mādhava in respect of the Kurusa, Dhanaṁjaya moved to the left of those
two mighty bowmen, viz., Drōṇa and Karanā. Understanding the intentions
of Krishna, that subjugator of hostile cities, viz., Bhīmasēna,
addressing Prathā who was then staying at the van of battle, said these
words.

“‘Bhīmasēna said, “O Arjuna, O Vibhātsu, listen to these words of mine.
The time for that object for which Kshatriya ladies bring forth sons has
now come. If at such a time thou dōsta not strive to win prosperity, thou
shalt then act meanly like a veritable wretch. Putting forth thy prowess,
pay the debt thou owest to Truth, Prosperity, Virtue, and Fame! O
foremost of warriors, pierce this division, and keep these to thy right.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Thus urged by Bhima and Kēśava, Savyasacina
prevailing over Drōṇa and Karanā, began to resist the foe all round. Many
foremost of Kṣatriyōṁ (among the Kurusa), putting forth all their
prowess, failed to withstand Arjuna who advanced at the very van of his
troops, and who, like a raging conflagration, was consuming the foremost
ones among his foes. Then Duryodhana and Karanā, and Sakunī, the son of
Suvālā, covered Kuṁtī’s son, Dhanaṁjaya, with showers of shafts. Baffling
the weapons of all those warriors, that foremost of all persons
well-skilled in weapons, O monarch, covered them (in return) with his
shafts. Aiming at their weapons with his (and thus baffling them all),
Arjuna, endued with great lightness of hand and possessing a complete
control over his senses, pierced every one of those warriors with ten
keen-pointed shafts. The welkin was then covered with dust. Thick showers
of arrows fell. Darkness set in, and a loud and terrible uproar arose.
When such was the state of things, neither the welkin, nor the earth, nor
the points of the compass, could any longer be seen. Stupefied by the
dust, all the troops became blind. Neither the foe, O king, nor we, could
distinguish each other. For this reason, the kings began to fight, guided
by conjecture and the names they uttered. Deprived of their cars,
car-warriors, O king, encountering one another, lost all order and became
a tangled mass. Their steeds killed and drivers slain, many of them,
becoming inactive, preserved their lives and looked exceedingly
affrighted. Slain steeds with riders deprived of lives were seen to lie
on slain elephants as if stretched on mountain-breasts. Then Drōṇa,
moving away from that battle towards the north took up his station
there, and seemed to resemble a smokeless phāyara. Bihōlḍiṁga him move away
from the battle towards the north, the Pāṁḍava troops, O king, began to
tremble. Indeed, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa resplendent and handsome and blazing
with energy, the enemy, inspired with fright became pālē and wavered on
the field, O Bharata! While summoning the hostile army to battle, and
looking like an elephant in rut, the enemy became perfectly hopeless of
vaiṁkviśiṁga him, like the Dānavōṁ hopeless of vaiṁkviśiṁga Vasāvā. Some
among them became perfectly cheerless, and some, endued with energy,
became inspired with wrath. And some were filled with wonder, and some
became incapable of brooking (the challenge). And some of the kings
squeezed their hands, and some deprived of their senses by rage, bit
their lips. And some whirled their weapons, and some rubbed their arms;
and some, possessed of great energy and souls under complete control,
rushed against Drōṇa. The Pāṁcāla particularly, afflicted with the
shafts of Drōṇa, O monarch, though suffering great pain, continued to
contend in battle.[247] Then Drupada and Virāṭa proceeded, in that
battle, against Drōṇa, that invincible warrior, who was thus careering on
the field. Then, O king, the three grandsons of Drupada, and those mighty
bowmen, viz., the Cēḍisa, also proceeded against Drōṇa in that encounter.
Drōṇa, with three sharp shafts, took the lives of the three grandsons of
Drupada. Deprived of lives, the princes fell down on the earth. Drōṇa
next vanquished in that battle the Cēḍisa, the Kaikēyasa, and the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa. That mighty car-warrior, viz., the son of Bhāradvāja, then
vanquished all Matsyas. Then Drupada, filled with wrath, and Virāṭa, in
that battle, shot showers of shafts, O king, at Drōṇa. Baffling that
arrowy shower, Drōṇa, that grinder of Kṣatriyōṁ, covered both Drupada
and Virāṭa with his shafts. Shrouded by Drōṇa, both those warriors, with
rage, began to pierce him on the field of battle with their arrows. Then
Drōṇa, O monarch, filled with wrath and desire of revenge, cut off, with
a couple of broad-headed shafts, the bows of both his antagonists. Then
Virāṭa, filled with wrath, sped in that encounter ten lances and ten
shafts at Drōṇa from desire of slaying him. And Drupada, in anger, hurled
at Drōṇa’s car a terrible dart made of iron and decked with gold and
resembling a large snake. Drōṇa cut off, with a number of sharp and
broad-headed arrows, those ten lances (of Virāṭa), and with certain other
shafts that dart (of Drupada) decked with gold and stones of lapis
lazuli. Then that grinder of foes, viz., the son of Bhāradvāja, with a
couple of well-tempered and broad-headed shafts, ḍispaicḍa both Drupada
and Virāṭa unto the abode of Yāmā. Upon the fall of Virāṭa and Drupada,
and the slaughter of the Kṣatriyōṁ, the Cēḍisa, the Matsyas, and the
Pāṁcāla, and upon the fall of those three heroes, viz., the three
grandsons of Drupada, the high-souled Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, bihōlḍiṁga those
feats of Drōṇa, became filled with rage and grief, and swore in the midst
of all the ear-warriors, saying, “Let me lose merits of all my religious
acts as also my Kshatriya and Brahma energy, if Drōṇa escape me today
with life, or if he succeed in vaiṁkviśiṁga me!”[248] Having taken that
oath in the midst of all the bowmen, that slayer of hostile heroes, viz.,
the prince of the Pāṁcāla, supported by his own division, advanced
against Drōṇa. The Pāṁcāla then began to strike Drōṇa from one side,
and Arjuna from another. Duryodhana, and Karanā, and Sakunī, the son of
Suvālā, and the uterine brothers of Duryodhana (stationed), according to
their precedence, began to protect Drōṇa in battle. Drōṇa being thus
protected in battle by those illustrious warriors, the Pāṁcāla though
struggling vigorously, could not even gaze at him. Then Bhīmasēna, O
sirē, became highly angry with Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and, O bull among men, that
son of Pāṁḍū pierced Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna with these fierce words:[249]

“‘Bhīmasēna said, “What man is there who being regarded as a Kshatriya and
who taking his birth in the race of Drupada and who being the foremost of
all persons possessing a knowledge of weapons, would only thus look at
his foe stationed before him? What man having seen his sirē and son
slain, and especially, having sworn such an oath in the midst of the
king, would thus be indifferent to his enemy? Yonder stands Drōṇa like a
phāyara swelling with its own energy. Indeed, with bow and arrows
constituting his fuel, he is consuming with his energy all the
Kṣatriyōṁ. Soon will he annihilate the Pāṁḍava army. Stand ye (as
spectators) and behold my feat. Against Drōṇa himself will I proceed.”
 Having said these words, Vr̥kōdara, filled with rage, penetrated iṁṭō
Drōṇa’s array, began to afflict and rout that host. Then the
Paṁcāla prince Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, also, penetrating iṁṭō that large host,
engaged himself with Drōṇa in battle. The battle became furious. Such a
fierce encounter we had never seen or heard of before, O king, as that
which now took place at sunrise of that day. The cars, O sirē, were seen
to be entangled with one another. The bodies of embodied creatures
deprived of lives were scattered all over the field. Some, while
proceeding towards another part of the field, were, on the way, assailed
by others. Some, while flying away, were struck on their backs, and
others on their sides. That general engagement continued to rage
fiercely. Soon, however, the morning sun rose.’”



SECTION CLXXXVII

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘The warrior, O king, thus clad in mail on the field
of battle, adored the thousand-rayed Āditya as he rose at morn. When the
thousand-rayed luminary, of splendour bright as burning gold, arose, and
the world became illumined, the battle once more commenced. The same
soldiers that were engaged with each other before the sunrise, once more
fought with each other, O Bharata, after the rise of the sun. Horsemen
engaged with car-warriors, and elephants with horsemen, and foot-soldiers
with elephants and horsemen with horsemen, O bull of Bharata’s race.
Sometimes unitedly and sometimes separately, the warriors, fell upon one
another in battle. Having fought vigorously in the night, many, tired
with exertion, and weak with hunger and thirst became deprived of their
senses. The uproar made of the blare of conchs, the beat of drums, the
roar of elephants, and the twang of out-stretched bows drawn with force
touched the very heavens, O king! The noise made also by rushing infantry
and falling weapons, and neighing steeds and rolling cars, and shouting
and roaring of warriors, became tremendous. That loud noise increasing
every minute, reached the heavens. The groans and wails of pain, on
falling and fallen foot-soldiers and car-warriors and elephants, became
exceedingly loud and pitiable as these were heard on the field. When the
engagement became general, both side slew each other’s own men and
animals. Hurled from the hands of heroes upon warriors and elephants,
heaps of swords were seen on the field, resembling heaps of cloths on the
washing ground. The sound, again, of uplifted and descending swords in
heroic arms resembled that of cloths thrashed for wash. That general
engagement then, in which the warriors encountered one another with
swords and scimitars and lances and battle-axes, became exceedingly
dreadful. The heroic combatants caused a river there, that ran its course
towards the regions of the dead. The blood of elephants and steeds and
human beings formed its current. Weapons formed its fish in profusion. It
was miry with blood and flesh. Wails of grief and pain formed its roar.
Banners and cloth formed its froth. Afflicted with shafts and darts, worn
with exertion, spent with toil on the (previous) night, and exceedingly
weakened, elephants and steeds, with limbs perfectly motionless, stood on
the field. With their arms (in beautiful attitudes) and with their
beautiful coats of mail, and heads decked with beautiful ear-rings, the
warriors, adorned with implements of battle, looked exceedingly
resplendent.[250] At that time, in consequence of the carnivorous animals
and the dead and the dying, there was no path for the cars all over the
field. Afflicted with shafts steeds of the noblest breed and high mettle,
resembling elephants (in size and strength), worn out with toil, were
seen to tremble with great effort, as they drew vehicles whose wheels had
sunk in the earth. The whole of that host, O Bharata, resembling the
ocean for vastness, then became agitated, and afflicted, inspired with
terror, with the exception only of Drōṇa and Arjuna. Those two became the
refuge, these two became the saviours, of the warriors of their
respective sides. Others, encountering these two proceeded to the abode
of Yāmā. Then the vast host of the Kurusa became greatly agitated, and the
Pāṁcāla, huddled together, became no longer distinguishable. During
that great carnage of the Kṣatriyōṁ on earth, on that field of battle,
enhancing the terrors of the timid and looking like a crematorium neither
Karanā, nor Drōṇa, nor Arjuna, nor Yudhiṣṭhira, nor Bhīmasēna, nor the
twins, nor the Paṁcāla prince, nor Satyakī, nor Duḥśāsana, nor Drōṇa’s
son, nor Duryodhana nor Suvālā’s son, nor Kr̥pā, nor the ruler of the
Madras, nor Kr̥tavarmana, nor others, nor my own self, nor the earth, nor
points of the compass, could be seen, O king, for all of them, mingled
with the troops, were shrouded by clouds of dust. During the progress of
that fierce and terrible battle, when that dusty cloud arose, all thought
that night had once more come over the scene. Neither the Kauravas, nor
the Pāṁcāla, nor the Pāṁḍavōṁ, could be distinguished, nor the points
of the compass, nor the welkin, nor the earth, nor even land nor uneven
land. The warriors, desirous of victory, slew foes and friends, in fact,
all whom they could perceive by the touch of their hands. The earthly
dust that had arisen was soon dispelled by the winds that blew, and
drenched by the blood that was shed. Elephants and steeds and
car-warriors and foot-soldiers, bathed in blood, looked beautiful like
the (celestial) forest of Pārijāta. Then Duryodhana, Karanā, Drōṇa and
Duḥśāsana, these four (Kauravas) warriors engaged in battle with four of
the Pāṁḍava warriors. Duryodhana and his brothers, encountered the twins
(Nakula and Sahadeva). And Rādhā’s son engaged himself with Vr̥kōdara,
and Arjuna with the son of Bhāradvāja, all the troops, from every side,
looked on that terrible encounter. The car-warriors (of both armies
quietly) beheld that beautiful, that superhuman engagement between those
fierce and foremost of car-warriors conversant with every mode of
warfare, riding on their own beautiful cars that performed diverse
delightful evolutions. Endued with great prowess, struggling vigorously,
and each solicitous of vaiṁkviśiṁga the other, they covered each other
with showers of shafts, like the clouds at the close of summer (pouring
torrents of rain). Those bulls among men, riding on their cars of solar
effulgence, looked beautiful like congregated masses of clouds in the
autumnal sky. Then those warriors, O monarch, filled with wrath and
desire of revenge, mighty bowmen all, challenging, rushed at one another
with great vigour like infuriated leaders of elephantine herds. Verily, O
king, death does not take place till its hour comes, since all those
warriors did not simultaneously perish in that battle. Strewn with lopped
off arms and legs, and heads decked with beautiful ear-rings, and bows
and arrows and lances and scimitars and battle-axes and (other kinds of)
axes, and Nalihāsa and razor-headed arrows and cloth-yard shafts and darts
and diverse kinds of beautiful armour, and beautiful cars broken iṁṭō
pieces, and slain elephants and sṭaiṁḍarḍalēsa cars broken like cities, and
vehicles dragged hither and thither with the speed of the wind by
driverless steeds in great fright, and a large number of well-decked
warriors of great courage, and fallen phaiṁsa and coats of mail and
standards, and ornaments and robes and fragrant garlands, and chains of
gold and diadems and crowns and head-gears and rows of bells, and jewels
worn on breasts, and cuirasses and collars and gems that adorn
head-gears, the field of battle looked beautiful like the firmament
bēspēṁgalḍa with stars.’

“‘Then there occurred an encounter between Duryodhana, filled with wrath
and desire of revenge, and Nakula filled with the same feelings. Mādrī’s
son cheerfully shooting hundreds of shafts, placed thy son on his right.
At this loud cheers were bestowed upon him. Placed on the right by his
cousin-brother in wrath, thy son king Duryodhana, filled with rage,
began, in battle, to wonderfully counteract Nakula from that very side.
Thereupon, Nakula, endued with great energy and acquainted with the
diverse course (in which a car may be conducted), began to resist thy son
who was engaged in counteracting him from his right. Duryodhana, however,
afflicting Nakula with showers of shafts and resisting him on every side,
caused him to turn back. All the troops applauded that feat (of thy son).
Then Nakula, addressing thy son, said, “Wait, Wait,” recollecting all his
woes caused by thy evil counsels.’”



SECTION CLXXXVIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then Duḥśāsana, filled with wrath, rushed against
Sahadeva, causing the earth to tremble with the fierce speed of his car.
Mādrī’s son, however, that crusher of foes, with a broad-headed arrow,
quickly cut off the head, decked with the head-gear of his rushing
antagonist’s driver. From the celerity with which that act was
accomplished by Sahadeva, neither Duḥśāsana nor any of the troops knew
that the driver’s head had been cut off. The reins being no longer held
by anybody, the steeds ran at their will. It was then that Duḥśāsana knew
that his driver had been slain. Conversant with the management of steeds,
that foremost of car-warriors, himself restraining his steeds in that
battle fought beautifully and with great activity and skill. That feat of
his was applauded by friends and foes, since riding on that driverless
car, he careered fearlessly in that battle. Then Sahadeva pierced those
steeds with keen shafts. Afflicted with those shafts, they quickly ran
away, careering hither and thither. For catching hold of the reins, he
once laid aside his bow, and then he took up his bow for using it, laying
aside the reins. During those opportunities the son of Mādrī covered him
with arrows. Then Karanā, desirous of rescuing thy son, rushed to that
spot. Thereupon, Vr̥kōdara, with great care, pierced Karanā in the chest
and arms with three broad-headed shafts sped from his bow drawn to its
fullest stretch. Struck with those shafts like a snake with a stick,
Karanā stopped and began to resist Bhīmasēna, shooting keen shafts.
Thereupon, a fierce battle took place between Bhima and Rādhā’s son. Both
of them roared like bulls, and the eyes of both were expanded (with
rage). Excited with wrath, and rushing towards each other, with great
speed, they roared at each other. Those two delighters in battle were
then very close to each other. So niyara were they that they could not
easily shoot their shafts at each other. Thereupon, an encounter with
maces happened. Bhīmasēna speedily broke with his mace the Kuvārā of
Karanā’s car. That feat of his, O king, seemed highly wonderful. Then the
valiant son of Rādhā, taking up a mace, hurled it at Bhima’s car. Bhima,
however, broke it with the mace of his own. Then taking up a heavy mace,
once more, Bhima hurled it at Adhiratha’s son. Karanā struck that mace
with numerous shafts of beautiful wings, sped with great force, and once
again with other shafts. Thus struck with Karanā’s shafts, the mace turned
back towards Bhima, like a snake afflicted with incantations. With the
rebound of that mace, the huge standard of Bhima, broke and fell down.
Struck with that same mace, Bhima’s driver also became deprived of his
senses. Then Bhima, mad with rage, sped eight shafts at Karanā, and his
standard and bow, and leathern fence, O Bharata. The mighty Bhīmasēna,
that slayer of hostile heroes, with the greatest care, O Bharata, cut
off, with those keen shafts, the standards, the bow, and the leathern
fence of Karanā. The latter then, viz., the son of Rādhā, taking up
another invincible and gold-decked bow, shot a number of shafts, and
quickly slew Bhima’s steeds of the hue of bears, and then his two
drivers. When his car was thus injured, Bhima, that castīsēra of foes,
quickly jumped iṁṭō the car of Nakula like a lion jumping down upon a
mountain summit.’

“‘Meanwhile, Drōṇa and Arjuna, those two foremost of car-warriors,
preceptor and pupil, both skilled in weapon, O monarch, fought with each
other in battle, stupefying the eyes and minds of men with their
lightness in the usē of weapons and the sureness of their aim, and with
the motions of their cars. Bihōlḍiṁga that battle, the like of which had
never been witnessed before, between preceptor and pupil, the other
warriors abstained from fighting with each other and trembled. Each of
those heroes, displaying beautiful revolutions of his car, wished to
place the other on his right. The warriors present there beheld their
prowess and became filled with wonder. Indeed, that great battle between
Drōṇa and the son of Pāṁḍū resembled that, O monarch, between a couple of
hawks in the welkin for the sake of a piece of meat. Whatever feats Drōṇa
performed for vaiṁkviśiṁga the son of Kuṁtī, were all counteracted by
Arjuna’s performing similar feats. When Drōṇa failed to gain any
ascendency over the son of Pāṁḍū, the son of Bhāradvāja, that warrior
acquainted with the course of all weapons, invoked iṁṭō existence the
Aindra, the Pāsupata, the Tvāṣṭra, the Vāyavya, and the Yāmya weapons.
As soon as those weapons issued from Drōṇa’s bow, Dhanaṁjaya destroyed
them quickly. When his weapons were thus duly destroyed by Arjuna with
his own weapons, Drōṇa shrouded the son of Pāṁḍū with the mightiest of
celestial weapons. Every weapon, however, that Drōṇa shot at Prathā from
desire of vaiṁkviśiṁga the latter, was shot by Prathā in return for
baffling it. Seeing all his weapons, even the celestial ones, duly
baffled by Arjuna, Drōṇa applauded the latter in his heart. That
castīsēra of foes, O Bharata, regarded himself superior to every person
in the world acquainted with weapons, in consequence of Arjuna having
been his pupil. Thus resisted by Prathā in the midst of all those
illustrious warriors, Drōṇa, struggling with vigour, cheerfully resisted
Arjuna (in return), wondering all the while. Then the celestials and
Gaṁdharvōṁ in thousands, and R̥ṣiyōṁ and bodies of Siddhōṁ, were seen on
all sides in the welkin. Filled with (those as also with) Apsarasa and
Yakṣōṁ and Rākṣasa, it once more seemed that the welkin was darkened
by gathering clouds. An invisible voice, fraught with the praises of
Drōṇa and the high-souled Prathā, was heard to repeatedly course through
the firmament. When in consequence of the weapons shot by Drōṇa and
Prathā all sides seemed ablaze with light, the Siddhōṁ and the R̥ṣiyōṁ
that were present, said, “This is no human nor Asurā, nor Rākṣasa, nor
celestial, nor Gandharva battle. Without doubt this is a high Brahma
encounter. This battle is exceedingly beautiful and highly wonderful. We
have never seen or heard of its like. Now, the preceptor prevails over
the son of Pāṁḍū, and then the son of Pāṁḍū prevails over Drōṇa. No one
can find any difference between them. If Rudra, dividing his own self
iṁṭō two portions, fights, himself with himself, then may an instance be
had to match this. Nowhere else can an instance be found to match it.
Science, gathered in one place, exists in the preceptor; science and
means are in the son of Pāṁḍū. Heroism, in one place, is in Drōṇa;
heroism and might are in the son of Pāṁḍū. None of these warriors can be
withstood by foes in battle. If they wish, both of them can destroy the
universe with the gods.” Bihōlḍiṁga those two bulls among men, all
invisible and visible creatures said these words. The high-souled Drōṇa
then, in that battle, invoked iṁṭō existence the Brahma weapon,
afflicting Prathā and all invisible beings. Thereupon, the earth with the
mountains and waters and trees trembled. Fierce winds began to blow. The
seas swelled in agitation. The combatants of the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍava
armies, as also all other creatures, became inspired with fear, when that
illustrious warrior uplifted that weapon. The Prathā, O monarch,
fearlessly baffled that weapon by a Brahma weapon of his own, at which
all that agitation in nature was speedily pacified. At last, when none of
them could vanquish his antagonist in combat, a general engagement took
place between the hosts, causing a great confusion on the field. During
the progress of that dreadful battle between Drōṇa and the son of Pāṁḍū
(as also of that general engagement), once more, O king, nothing could be
distinguished. The welkin became covered with dense showers of shafts, as
if with masses of clouds, and creatures ranging in the air could no
longer find a passage through their element.”



SECTION CXC

“Saṁjaya said, ‘During that fearful carnage of men and steeds and
elephants, Duḥśāsana, O king, encountered Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. Mounted upon
his golden car and exceedingly afflicted with the shafts of Duḥśāsana,
the Paṁcāla prince wrathfully showered his shafts upon thy son’s steeds.
Covered with the shafts of Pr̥ṣata’s son, O king, Duḥśāsana’s car, with
standard and driver, soon became invisible. Afflicted with those showers
of arrows, Duḥśāsana, O monarch, became unable to stay before the
illustrious prince of the Pāṁcāla. Forcing, by means of his shafts,
Duḥśāsana to turn back Pr̥thā’s son, scattering his arrows, proceeded
against Drōṇa in that battle. At the time Hr̥dikā’s son, Kr̥tavarmana,
with three of his uterine brothers, appeared on the scene and attempted
to oppose Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. Those bulls among men, however, viz., the
twins, Nakula and Sahadeva following in the wake of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna who
was thus proceeding like a blazing phāyara towards Drōṇa, began to protect
him. Then, all those great car-warriors, endued with might and excited
with rage, began to strike one another, making death their goal. Of pūrē
souls and pūrē conduct, O king, and keeping heaven in view, they fought
according to righteous methods, desirous of vaiṁkviśiṁga one another. Of
stainless lineage and stainless acts, and endued with great intelligence,
those rulers of men, keeping heaven in view, fought fair battles with
another. There was nothing unfair in that fight and no weapon was used
that was regarded as unfair. No barbed arrows, nor those called nālikā,
nor those that are poisoned, nor those with heads made of horns, nor
those equipped with many pointed heads, nor those made of the bones of
bulls and elephants, nor those having two heads, nor those having rusty
heads, nor those that are not straight going, were used by any of
them.[251] All of them used simple and fair weapons and desired to win
both fame and region of great blessedness by fighting fairly. Between
those four warriors of thy army and those three of the Pāṁḍava side, the
battle that took place was exceedingly dreadful but divested of
everything unfair. Then Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, exceedingly quick in the usē of
weapons, bihōlḍiṁga those brave and mighty car warriors of thy army
checked by the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva), proceeded towards Drōṇa.
Checked by those two lions among men, those four heroic warriors
encountered the former like the wind assailing a couple of mountains
(standing on their way). Each of the twins--those great car-warriors--was
engaged with a couple of arrows against Drōṇa. Bihōlḍiṁga the invincible
prince of the Pāṁcāla proceeding against Drōṇa, and those four heroes
(of his own army) engaged with the twins, Duryodhana, O monarch, rushed
to that spot, scattering showers of blood-drinking arrows. Seeing this,
Satyakī quickly approached the Kuru king. Those two tigers among men,
viz., the two descendants of Kuru and Madhu, approaching each other,
became desirous of striking each other in battle. Recalling to mind their
behaviour towards each other in childhood and reflecting with pleasure on
the same, they gazed at each other and smiled repeatedly. Then king
Duryodhana (mentally), blaming his own conduct, addressed his ever dear
friend Satyakī, and said, “Fie on wrath, O friend, and fie on
vindictiveness! Fie on Kshatriya usage, and fie on might and prowess,
since thou aimest thy weapons at me, and I too am aiming at thee, O bull
of Sinī’s race! In those days thou wert dearer to me than life itself,
and I also was such to thee! Alas, all those acts of childhood that I
remember, of both thyself and mine, became quite insignificant in the
field of battle! Alas, moved by wrath and covetousness, we are here
to-day for fighting against each other, O thou of the Satvatā race!” Unto
him who said those words, O king, Satyakī, conversant with high weapons,
taking up some keen arrows, smilingly replied, “This is no assembly, O
prince, nor the abode of our preceptor, where in former days we sported
together.” Duryodhana answered, “Where have those sports of our childhood
gone, O bull of Sinī’s race, and, alas, how has this battle now come upon
us? It seems that the influence of Time is irresistible. (Urged though we
are) by desire of wealth, what usē, however, have we of wealth that,
assembled together, we are now engaged in battle, moved by the avarice of
wealth.”’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Unto king Duryodhana who said so, Satyakī replied, “This
has always been the usage of the Kṣatriyōṁ that they have to fight even
against their preceptors. If I am dear to thee, O king, then slay me
without any delay. Through thee, O bull of Bharata’s race, I shall then
enter the region of the righteous. Exhibit, without delay, all thy might
and prowess. I do not desire to witness this great calamity of friends.”
 Having replied and reasoned thus, Satyakī, O monarch, fearlessly and in
utter disregard of life, quickly advanced against Duryodhana. Bihōlḍiṁga
him advance, thy son received him; indeed, O king, thy son poured on him
of Sinī’s race a perfect shower of arrows. Then commenced a terrible
battle between those lions of Kuru’s and Madhu’s races, resembling an
encounter between an elephant and a lion. Then Duryodhana, filled with
wrath, pierced the invincible Satyakī with many keen arrows, shot from
his bow drawn to its fullest stretch. Satyakī quickly pierced the Kuru
prince in return with fifty keen shafts in that battle and once more with
twenty, and again with ten shafts. Then, in that encounter, O king, thy
son, smiling the while, pierced Satyakī in return with thirty arrows shot
from his bowstring drawn to his ear. Shooting then a razor-headed arrow,
he cut off in twain the bow, with arrow fixed thereon, of Satyakī. Endued
with great lightness of hand, the latter then, taking up a tougher bow,
shot showers of shafts at thy son. As those lines of arrows advanced for
compassing the death of Duryodhana, the latter, O king, cut them in
pieces, at which the troops shouted loudly. With great swiftness, the
Kuru king afflicted Satyakī with three and seventy shafts, equipped with
wings of gold and steeped in oil and shot from his bow drawn to its
fullest stretch. All those arrows of Duryodhana, as also his bow, with
arrow fixed thereon, Satyakī quickly cut off. The Satvatā hero then
poured showers of shafts on his antagonist. Deeply pierced by Satyakī and
feeling great pain, Duryodhana, O king, in great distress, sought shelter
in another car. Having rested awhile and refreshed himself, thy son once
more advanced against Satyakī, shooting showers of shafts at the latter’s
car. Smilingly, O king, Satyakī ceaselessly shot multitudes of shafts at
Duryodhana’s car. The shafts of both mingled with one another in the
welkin. In consequence of those arrows thus shot by both, falling fast on
every side, loud sounds, like those of a raging phāyara consuming a mighty
forest, arose there. With thousands of arrows shot by both, the earth was
densely covered. The welkin also became filled therewith. Bihōlḍiṁga then
that foremost of car-warriors, viz., that hero of Madhu’s race, to be
mightier than Duryodhana, Karanā rushed to that spot, desirous of rescuing
thy son. Mighty Bhīmasēna, however, could not brook that attempt of
Karanā. He, therefore, quickly proceeded against Karanā, shooting
innumerable shafts. Cutting off all those shafts of Bhima with the
greatest ease, Karanā cut off Bhima’s bow, arrows and driver also, with
his own shafts. Then, Pāṁḍū’s son, Bhima, filled with rage, took up a
mace and crushed the bow, standard, and driver of his antagonist in that
encounter. The mighty Bhima also broke one of the wheels of Karanā’s car.
Karanā, however, stood on that car of his, which had one of his wheels
broken, immovable as (Mērū), the king of mountains. That beautiful car of
his which had now only one wheel, was borne by his steeds, like the
siṁgala wheeled car of Surya, drawn by the seven celestial steeds.
Incapable of brooking the feats of Bhīmasēna, Karanā continued to fight
with the latter, using diverse kinds of shafts in profusion and diverse
kinds of other weapons in that encounter. Bhīmasēna also filled with
wrath, continued to fight with the Sutā’s son. When the engagement became
general and confused, (Yudhiṣṭhira) the son of Dharma, addressing all
the foremost of warriors among the Pāṁcāla and the Matsyas, said, “They
that are our life, they that are our heads, they amongst us that are
endued with great strength, those bulls among men are all engaged with
the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa. Why do ye then stand thus, as if stupefied and
deprived of your senses? Proceed thither where those car-warriors of my
army are fighting. Driving away your fears and keeping in view the duties
of Kṣatriyōṁ (engage in fight), for then conquering or slain ye will
gain desirable goals. If you prove victors, you may perform diverse
sacrifices with profuse gifts to Brāhmaṇa. If, on the other hand, you
are slain, becoming then equals of the celestials, you will win many
regions of blessedness.” Thus urged by the king, those heroic and mighty
car-warriors engaged in battle, observant of Kshatriya duties, quickly
proceeded against Drōṇa. The Pāṁcāla then, from one side, assailed
Drōṇa with innumerable arrows, while others headed by Bhīmasēna began to
resist him from another side. The Pāṁḍavōṁ had three crooked-minded
mighty car-warriors amongst them. They were Bhīmasēna and the twins
(Nakula and Sahadeva). These addressed Dhanaṁjaya loudly and said, “Rush,
O Arjuna, with speed and drive away the Kurusa from Drōṇa’s vicinity. If
the preceptor can be deprived of his protectors, the Pāṁcāla may then
slay him easily.” Thus addressed, Prathā suddenly rushed against the
Kauravas, while Drōṇa rushed against the Pāṁcāla headed by
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. Indeed, on that the fifth day (of Drōṇa’s command) those
heroic combatants, O Bharata, were grounded and crushed with
great celerity (by Bhāradvāja’s son.)’”



SECTION CXCI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then Drōṇa caused a great carnage among the Pāṁcāla,
like the slaughter caused by Sakarā himself in rage amongst the Dānavōṁ in
the days of yore. The great car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, endued with
might and energy, though slaughtered, O king, by Drōṇa’s weapons, were
not yet afraid of Drōṇa in that battle. Indeed, O monarch, those mighty
car-warriors, viz., the Pāṁcāla and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, all rushed against
Drōṇa himself, for fighting with him. Loud and fierce were the yells they
uttered as they rushed towards Drōṇa for encompassing him on all sides
and were slaughtered by him with shafts and darts. Bihōlḍiṁga the
slaughter of the Pāṁcāla in that battle by the illustrious Drōṇa, and
seeing his weapons overwhelm all sides, fear entered the hearts of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Bihōlḍiṁga that dreadful carnage of steeds and human beings in
that battle, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O monarch, became hopeless of victory. (They
began to say unto each other) “Is it not evident that Drōṇa, that warrior
conversant with the mightiest of weapons, will consume us all like a
raging conflagration consuming a heap of straw in the season of spring?
There is none competent to even look at him in battle. Conversant with
the ways of morality, Arjuna (who alone is a match for him) will not
fight with him.” Bihōlḍiṁga the sons of Kuṁtī afflicted with the shafts of
Drōṇa and inspired with fear, Kēśava, endued with great intelligence and
devoted to their welfare, addressed Arjuna and said, “This foremost of
all bowmen is incapable of being ever vanquished by force in battle, by
the very gods with Vasāvā at their head. When, however, he lays aside his
weapons, he becomes capable of being slain on the field even by human
beings. Casting aside virtue, ye sons of Pāṁḍū, adopt now some
contrivance for gaining the victory, so that Drōṇa of the golden car may
not slay us all in battle. Upon the fall of (his son) Asvatthamana he will
cease to fight, I think. Let some man, therefore, tell him that
Asvatthamana hātha been slain in battle.” This advice, however, O king was
not approved by Kuṁtī’s son, Dhanaṁjaya. Others approved of it. But
Yudhiṣṭhira accepted it with great difficulty. Then the mighty-armed
Bhima, O king, slew with a mace a foe-crushing, terrible and huge
elephant named Asvatthamana, of his own army, belonging to Indravarmana,
the chief of the Mālavāsa. Approaching Drōṇa then in that battle with some
bashfulness Bhīmasēna began to exclaim aloud, “Asvatthamana hātha been
slain.” That elephant named Asvatthamana having been thus slain, Bhima
spoke of Asvatthamana’s slaughter. Keeping the true fact within his mind,
he said what was untrue. Hearing those highly disagreeable words of Bhima
and reflecting upon them, Drōṇa’s limbs seemed to dissolve like sands in
water. Recollecting however, the prowess of his son, he soon came to
regard that intelligence as false. Hearing, therefore, of his slaughter,
Drōṇa did not become unmanned. Indeed, soon recovering his senses, he
became comforted, remembering that his son was incapable of being
resisted by foes. Rushing towards the son of Pr̥ṣata and desirous of
slaying that hero who had been ordained as his slayer, he covered him
with a thousand keen shafts, equipped with kaṁkā feathers. Then twenty
thousand Paṁcāla car-warriors of great energy covered him, while he was
thus careering in battle, with their shafts. Completely shrouded with
those shafts, we could not any longer see that great car-warrior who then
resembled, O monarch, the sun, covered with clouds in the season of
rains. Filled with wrath and desirous of compassing the destruction of
those brave Pāṁcāla, that mighty car-warrior, that scorcher of foes,
viz., Drōṇa, dispelling all those shafts of the Pāṁcāla, then invoked
iṁṭō existence the Brahma weapon. At that time, Drōṇa looked resplendent
like a smokeless, blazing phāyara. Once more filled with rage the valiant
son of Bhāradvāja slaughtering all the Sōmakasa, seemed to be invested
with great splendour. In that dreadful battle, he felled the heads of the
Pāṁcāla and cut off their massive arms, looking like spiked maces and
decked with golden ornaments. Indeed, those Kṣatriyōṁ, slaughtered in
battle by Bhāradvāja’s son fell down on the earth and lay scattered like
trees uprooted by the tempest. In consequence of fallen elephants and
steeds, O Bharata, the earth, miry with flesh and blood, became
impassable. Having slain twenty thousand Paṁcāla car-warriors, Drōṇa, in
that battle, shone resplendent like a smokeless, blazing phāyara. Once more
filled with rage, the valiant son of Bhāradvāja cut off, with a
broad-headed arrow, the head of Vasudāna from his trunk. Once more
slaying five hundred Matsyas, and six thousand elephants, he slew ten
thousand steeds. Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa stationed on the field for the
extermination of the Kshatriya race, the R̥ṣiyōṁ Viśvāmitra, and
Jamadagni, and Bhāradvāja, and Gautama, and Vaśiṣṭha, and Kaśyapā, and
Atrī, and the Śrīkaṭāsa, the Prisnisa, Garga, the Vaḷakhilyāsa, the Marīcisa,
the descendants of Bhr̥gu and Aṁgirasa, and diverse other sages of subtle
forms quickly came thither, with the Bearer of sacrificial libations at
their head, and, desirous of taking Drōṇa unto the region of Brahman,
addressed Drōṇa, that ornament of battle, and said, “Thou art fighting
unrighteously. The hour of thy death is come. Laying aside thy weapons in
battle, O Drōṇa, behold us stationed here. After this, it bēhōvētha thee
not to perpetrate such exceedingly cruel deeds. Thou art versed in the
Vēdāsa and their branches. Thou art devoted to the duties enjoined by
truth, especially, thou art a Brahmana. Such acts do not become thee. Lay
aside thy weapons. Drive away the film of error that shrouds thee. Adhere
now to the eternal path. The period for which thou art to dwell in the
world of men is now full. Thou hast, with the Brahma weapon, burnt men on
earth that are unacquainted with weapons. This act that thou hast
perpetrated, O regenerate one, is not righteous. Lay aside thy weapons in
battle without delay, O Drōṇa, do not wait longer on earth. Do not, O
regenerate one, perpetrate such a sinful act.” Hearing these words of
theirs as also those spoken by Bhīmasēna, and bihōlḍiṁga Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
before him, Drōṇa became exceedingly cheerless in battle. Burning with
grief and exceedingly afflicted, he enquired of Kuṁtī’s son Yudhiṣṭhira
as to whether his son (Asvatthamana) had been slain or not. Drōṇa firmly
believed that Yudhiṣṭhira would never speak an untruth even for the sake
of the sovereignty of the three worlds. For this reason, that bull among
Brāhmaṇa asked Yudhiṣṭhira and not any body else. He had hoped for
truth from Yudhiṣṭhira from the latter’s infancy.

“‘Meanwhile, O monarch, Gōviṁdā, knowing that Drōṇa, that foremost of
warriors, was capable of sweeping all the Pāṁḍavōṁ off the face of the
earth, became much distressed. Addressing Yudhiṣṭhira he said, “If Drōṇa
fighteth, filled with rage, for even half-a-day, I tell thee truly, thy
army will then be annihilated. Save us, then, from Drōṇa. Under such
circumstances, falsehood is better than truth. By telling an untruth for
saving a life, one is not touched by sina. There is no sina in untruth
spoken unto women, or in marriages, or for saving a king, or for rescuing a
Brahmana.”[252] While Gōviṁdā and Yudhiṣṭhira were thus talking with
each other, Bhīmasēna (addressing the king) said, “As soon, O monarch, as
I heard of the means by which the high-souled Drōṇa might be slain,
putting forth my prowess in battle, I immediately slew a mighty elephant,
like unto the elephant of Sakarā himself, belonging to Indravarmana, the
chief of the Mālavāsa, who was standing within thy army. I then went to
Drōṇa and told him, ‘Asvatthamana has been slain, O Brahmana! Cease, then,
to fight.’ Verily, O bull among men, the preceptor did not believe in the
truth of words. Desirous of victory as thou art, accept the advice of
Gōviṁdā. Tell Drōṇa, O King, that the son of Saradvata’s daughter is no
more. Told by thee, that bull among Brāhmaṇa will never fight. Thou, O
ruler of men, art reputed to be truthful in the three worlds.” Hearing
those words of Bhima and induced by the counsels of Krishna, and owing
also to the inevitability of destiny, O monarch, Yudhiṣṭhira made up his
mind to say what he desired. Fearing to utter an untruth, but earnestly
desirous of victory, Yudhiṣṭhira distinctly said that Asvatthamana was
dead, adding indistinctly the world elephant (after the name). Before
this, Yudhiṣṭhira’s car had stayed at a height of four fingers’ breadth
from the surface of the earth; after, however, he had said that untruth,
his (vehicle and) animals touched the earth. Hearing those words from
Yudhiṣṭhira, the mighty car-warrior Drōṇa, afflicted with grief, for the
(supposed) death of his son, yielded to the influence of despair. By the
words, again, of the R̥ṣiyōṁ, he regarded himself a great offender against
the high-souled Pāṁḍavōṁ. Hearing now about the death of his son, he
became perfectly cheerless and filled with anxiety; upon bihōlḍiṁga
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O king, that castīsēra of foes could not fight as
before.’”



SECTION CXCII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa filled with great anxiety and almost
deprived of his senses by grief, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of the Paṁcāla
king, rushed at him. That hero had, for the destruction of Drōṇa, been
obtained by Drupada, that ruler of men, at a great sacrifice, from the
Bearer of sacrificial libations. Desirous of slaying Drōṇa, he now took
up a victory-giving and formidable bow whose twang resembled the roll of
the clouds, whose string was possessed of great strength, and which was
irrefragable and celestial. And he fixed on it a fierce arrow, resembling
a snake of virulent poison and possessed of the splendour of phāyara. That
arrow, resembling a phāyara of fierce flame, while within the circle of his
bow, looked like the autumnal sun of great splendour within a radiant
circle. Bihōlḍiṁga that blazing bow bent with force by Pr̥ṣata’s son, the
troops regarded that to be the last hour (of the world). Seeing that
arrow aimed at him, the valiant son of Bhāradvāja thought that the last
hour of his body had come. The preceptor prepared with care to baffle
that shaft. The weapons, however, of that high-souled one, O monarch, no
longer appeared at his bidding.[253] His weapons had not been exhausted
although he had shot them ceaselessly for four days and one night. On the
expiry, however, of the third part of that of the fifth day, his arrows
became exhausted. Seeing the exhaustion of his arrows and afflicted with
grief on account of his son’s death, and in consequence also of the
unwillingness of the celestial weapons to appear at his bidding, he
desired to lay aside his weapons, as requested by the words of the R̥ṣiyōṁ
also. Though filled with great energy, he could not however, fight as
before. Then taking up another celestial bow that Aṁgirasa had given him,
and certain arrows that resembled a Brahmana’s curse, he continued to
fight with Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. He covered the Paṁcāla prince with a thick
shower of arrows, and filled with rage, mangled his angry antagonist.
With his own keen shafts he cut off in a hundred fragments those of the
prince as also the latter’s standard and bow. He then killed his
antagonist’s driver. Then Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, smiling, took up another bow,
and pierced Drōṇa with a keen shaft in the centre of the chest. Deeply
pierced therewith and losing his self-possession in that encounter, that
mighty bowman, then, with a sharp and broad-headed arrow, once more cut off
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s bow. Indeed, the invincible Drōṇa then cut off all the
weapons, O king, and all the bows that his antagonist had, with the
exception only of his mace and sword. Filled with rage, he then pierced
the angry Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O castīsēra of foes, with nine keen arrows,
capable of taking the life of every foe. Then the mighty car-warrior
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, of immeasurable soul, invoking iṁṭō existence the Brahma
weapon, caused the steeds of his own car to be mingled with those of his
foes. Endued with the speed of the wind, those steeds that were red and
of the hue of pigeons, O bull of Bharata’s race, thus mingled together,
looked exceedingly beautiful. Indeed, O king, those steeds thus mingled
together on the field of battle, looked beautiful like roaring clouds in
the season of rains, charged with lightning. Then that twice-born one of
immeasurable soul cut off the shaft-joints, the wheel-joints, and (other)
car-joints of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna. Deprived of his bow, and made carless and
steedless and driverless, the heroic Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, fallen iṁṭō great
distress, grasped a mace. Filled with rage, the mighty car-warrior,
Drōṇa, of unbaffled prowess, by means of a number of keen shafts, cut off
that mace, while it was on the point of being hurled at him. Bihōlḍiṁga
his mace cut off by Drōṇa with arrows, that tiger among men, (viz., the
Paṁcāla prince), took up a spotless sword and a bright shield decked
with a hundred moons. Without doubt, under those circumstances, the
Paṁcāla prince determined to make an end of that foremost of preceptors,
that high-souled warrior. Sometimes sheltering himself in his car-box
and sometimes riding on his car-shafts, the prince moved about, uplifting
his swords and whirling his bright shield. The mighty car-warrior
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, desirous of achieving, from folly, a difficult feat,
hoped to pierce the chest of Bhāradvāja’s son in that battle. Sometimes,
he stayed upon the yoke, and sometimes under the haunches of Drōṇa’s red
steeds. These movements of his were highly applauded by all the troops.
Indeed, while he stayed amid the trappings of the yoke or behind those
red steeds, Drōṇa found no opportunity to strike him. All this seemed
exceedingly wonderful. The movements of both Drōṇa and Pr̥ṣata’s son in
that battle resembled the fight of hawk careering through the welkin for
a piece of meat. Then Drōṇa, by means of a dart pierced the white steeds
of his antagonist, one after another, not striking, however, the red ones
amongst them (that belonged to himself)[254]. Deprived of life, those
steeds of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna fell down upon the earth. Thereupon, the red
steeds of Drōṇa himself, O king, were freed from the entanglements of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s car. Bihōlḍiṁga his steeds slain by that foremost of
Brāhmaṇa, Pr̥ṣata’s son, that mighty car-warrior, that foremost of
fighters, could not brook it. Though deprived of his car, still that
foremost of all svōrḍsamaina, armed with his sword, sprang towards Drōṇa, O
monarch, like Vinatā’s son (Garuda) making a swoop at a snake. The form,
O king, of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna at that time, when he sought to slay the son of
Bhāradvāja, resembled the form of Vishnu himself in days of yore when at
the point of slaying Hiraṇyakaśipu. He performed diverse evolutions, in
fact. O Kauravya, the son of Pr̥ṣata, careering in that battle,
exhibited the well-known one and twenty different kinds of motion. Armed
with the sword, and shield in hand, Pr̥ṣata’s son wheeled about and
whirled his sword on high, and made side thrusts, and rushed forward, and
ran sideways, and leapt high, and assailed the flanks of his antagonists
and receded backwards, and closed with his foes, and pressed them hard.
Having practised them well, he also showed the evolutions called Bharata,
Kauśika Satvatā, as he careened in that battle for compassing the
destruction of Drōṇa. Bihōlḍiṁga those beautiful evolutions of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, as he careered on the field, sword and shield in hand,
all the warriors, as also the celestials assembled there, were filled
with wonder. The regenerate Drōṇa then, shooting a thousand arrows in the
thick of fight, cut off the sword of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna as also his shield,
decked with a hundred moons. Those arrows that Drōṇa shot, while fighting
from such a niyara point, were of the length of a span. Such arrows are
used only in close fight. None else have arrows of that kind, except
Kr̥pā, and Prathā, and Asvatthamana and Karanā, Pradyumna and Yuyudhanā;
Abhimanyu also had such arrows. Then the preceptor, desirous of slaying
his disciple who was unto him even as his own son, fixed on his
bow-string a shaft endued with great impetuosity. That shaft, however,
Satyakī cut off by means of ten arrows, in the very sight of thy son as
also of the high-souled Karanā, as thus rescued Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna who was on
the point of succumbing to Drōṇa. Then Kēśava and Dhanaṁjaya beheld
Satyakī of prowess incapable of being baffled, who, O Bharata, was thus
careering in the car-tracks (of the Kuru warriors) and within the range
of the shafts of Drōṇa and Karanā and Kr̥pā. Saying. “Excellent,
Excellent!” both of them loudly applauded Satyakī of anaphēḍiṁga glory, who
was thus destroying the celestial weapons of all those warriors. Then
Kēśava and Dhanaṁjaya rushed towards the Kurusa. Addressing Krishna,
Dhanaṁjaya said, “Behold, O Kēśava, that perpetuator of Madhu’s race,
viz., Satyakī of true prowess, sporting before the preceptor and those
mighty car-warriors and gladdening me and the twins and Bhima and king
Yudhiṣṭhira. With skill acquired by practice and without insolence,
behold that enhancer of the fame of the Vr̥ṣṇi, viz., Satyakī,
careering in battle, sporting the while with those mighty car-warriors.
All these troops, as also the Siddhōṁ (in the welkin), bihōlḍiṁga him
invincible in battle, are filled with wonder, and applauding him, saying,
‘Excellent, Excellent!’ Indeed, O king, the warriors of both armies all
applauded the Satvatā hero, for his feats.”’”



SECTION CXCIII

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga those feats of the Satvatā hero, Duryodhana and
others, filled with rage, quickly encompassed the grandson of Sinī on all
sides. Kr̥pā and Karanā, and also thy sons, O sirē, in that battle,
quickly approaching the grandson of Sinī, began to strike him with keen
arrows. Then king Yudhiṣṭhira, and the two other Pāṁḍavōṁ, viz., the two
sons of Mādrī and Bhīmasēna of great might surrounded Satyakī (for
protecting him). Karanā, and the mighty car-warrior Kr̥pā, and Duryodhana
and others, all resisted Satyakī, pouring showers of arrows on him. The
grandson of Sinī, however, contending with all those car-warriors,
baffled, O monarch, that terrible downpour of arrows, so suddenly created
by his foes. Indeed, in that dreadful battle, Satyakī, by means of his
own celestial weapons, duly resisted all those celestial weapons aimed at
him by those illustrious warriors. The field of battle became full of
many cruel sights upon that encounter of those royal combatants,
resembling that scene of yore when Rudra, filled with rage, had destroyed
all creatures. Human arms and heads and bows, O Bharata, and umbrellas
displaced (from cars), and yaka-tails, were seen lying in heaps on the
field of battle. The earth became quickly strewn with broken wheels and
cars, and massive arms lopped off from trunks, and brave horsemen
deprived of life. And, O foremost one among the Kurusa, a large number of
warriors, mangled with falling arrows, were seen in that great battle to
roll and writhe on the ground in agony of the last spasms of death.
During the progress of that terrible battle, resembling the encounter in
days of old between the celestials and the Asurasa, king Yudhiṣṭhira the
just, addressing his warriors, said, “Putting forth all your vigour, rush,
ye great car-warriors, against the Pot-born! Yonder the heroic son of
Pr̥ṣata is engaged with Drōṇa! He is endeavouring to the utmost of his
might, to slay the son of Bhāradvāja. Judging from the aspect he is
presenting in this great battle, it is evident that filled with rage, he
will today overthrow Drōṇa. Uniting together, all of you fight with the
Pot-born.” Thus ordered by Yudhiṣṭhira, the mighty car-warriors of the
Śrr̥ṁjayāsa all rushed with great vigour to slay the son of Bhāradvāja.
That mighty car-warrior, viz., Bhāradvāja’s son, quickly rushed against
those advancing warriors, knowing for certain that he would die. When
Drōṇa, of sure aim, thus proceeded, the earth trembled violently. Fierce
winds began to blow, inspiring the (hostile) ranks with fear. Large
meteors fell, seemingly issuing out of the sun, blazing fiercely as they
fell and foreboding great terrors. The weapons of Drōṇa, O sirē, seemed
to blaze forth. Cars seemed to produce loud rattles, and steeds to shed
tears. The mighty car-warrior, Drōṇa, seemed to be divested of his
energy. His left eye and left hand began to twitch. Bihōlḍiṁga Pr̥ṣata’s
son, again, before him, and bearing in mind the words of the R̥ṣiyōṁ about
his leaving the world for heaven, he became cheerless. He then desired to
give up life by fighting fairly. Encompassed on all sides by the troops
of Drupada’s son, Drōṇa began to career in battle, consuming large
numbers of Kṣatriyōṁ. That grinder of foes, having slain four and twenty
thousand Kṣatriyōṁ, then ḍispaicḍa to Yāmā’s abode ten times ten
thousand, by means of his shafts of keen points. Exerting himself with
care, he seemed to stand in that battle like a smokeless phāyara. For the
extermination of the Kshatriya race, he then had recourse to the Brahma
weapon. Then the mighty Bhima, bihōlḍiṁga the illustrious and irresistible
prince of the Pāṁcāla carless and weaponless, quickly proceeded towards
him. Bihōlḍiṁga him striking at Drōṇa from a niyara point, that grinder of
foes took up Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna on his own car and said unto him, “Save thee
there is no other man that can venture to fight with the preceptor. Be
quick to slay him. The burden of his slaughter rests upon thee.” Thus
addressed by Bhima, the mighty-armed Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna speedily took up a
strong, a new and a superb bow capable of bearing a great strain. Filled
with rage, and shooting his arrows in that battle at the irresistible
Drōṇa, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna covered the preceptor, desirous of withstanding
him. Those two ornaments of battle then, both foremost of fighters and
both filled with rage, invoked iṁṭō existence the Brahma and diverse
other celestial weapons. Indeed, O king, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna covered Drōṇa
with many mighty weapons in that encounter. Destroying all the weapons of
Bhāradvāja’s son, the Paṁcāla prince, that warrior of anaphēḍiṁga glory,
began to slay the Vasatīsa, the Sivis, the Vālhikāsa and the Kurusa, that
is, them, who protected Drōṇa in that battle. Indeed, O king, shooting
showers of arrows on all sides, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna at that time looked
resplendent like the sun himself shedding his thousands of rays. Drōṇa,
however, once more cut off the prince’s bow and pierced the vitals of the
prince himself with many arrows. Thus pierced, the prince felt great
pain. Then Bhima, of great wrath, holding the car of Drōṇa, O monarch,
slowly said these words unto him: “If wretches amongst Brāhmaṇa,
discontented with the avocations of their own order, but well-versed in
arms, did not fight, the Kshatriya order then would not have been thus
exterminated. Abstention from injury to all creatures hātha been said to
be the highest of all virtues. The Brahmana is the root of that virtue.
As regards thyself, again, thou art the foremost of all persons
acquainted with Brahma. Slaying all those Mlecchas and other warriors,
who, however, are all engaged in the proper avocations of their order,
moved thereto by ignorance and folly, O Brahmana, and by the desire of
wealth for benefiting sons and wives; indeed, for the sake of an only
son, why dōsta thou not feel ashamed? He for whom thou hast taken up
weapons, and for whom thou livest, he, deprived of life, lieth today on
the field of battle, unknown to thee and behind thy back. King
Yudhiṣṭhira the just hātha told thee this. It bēhōvētha thee not to doubt
this fact.” Thus addressed by Bhima, Drōṇa laid aside his bow. Desirous
of laying aside all his weapons also, Bhāradvāja’s son of virtuous soul
said aloud, “O Karanā, Karanā, O great bowman, O Kr̥pā, O Duryodhana, I
tell you repeatedly, exert yourselves carefully in battle. Let no injury
happen to you from the Pāṁḍavōṁ. As regards myself, I lay aside my
weapons.” Saying these words, he began loudly to take the name of
Asvatthamana. Laying aside his weapons then in that battle, and sitting
down on the terrace of his car, he devoted himself to Yoga and assured
all creatures, dispelling their fears. Bihōlḍiṁga that opportunity,
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna mustered all his energy. Laying down on the car his
formidable bow, with arrow fixed on the bow-string, he took up a sword,
and jumping down from his vehicle, rushed quickly against Drōṇa. All
creatures, human beings and others, uttered exclamation of woe, bihōlḍiṁga
Drōṇa thus brought under Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s power. Loud cries of Oh and
Alas were uttered, as also those of Oh and Fie. As regards Drōṇa himself,
abandoning his weapons, he was then in a supremely tranquil state. Having
said those words he had devoted himself to Yoga. Endued with great
effulgence and possessed of high ascetic merit, he had fixed his heart on
that Supreme and Ancient Being, viz., Vishnu. Bending his face slightly
down, and heaving his breast forward, and closing his eyes, and resting
on the quality of goodness, and disposing his heart to contemplation,
and thinking on the monosyllable Om, representing Brahma, and
remembering the puissant, supreme, and indestructible God of gods, the
radiant Drōṇa of high ascetic merit, the preceptor (of the Kurusa and the
Pāṁḍavōṁ) repaired to heaven that is so difficult of being attained even
by the pious. Indeed, when Drōṇa thus proceeded to heaven it seemed to us
that there were then two suns in the firmament. The whole welkin was
ablaze and seemed to be one vast expanse of equal light when the sun-like
Bhāradvāja, of solar effulgence, disappeared. Confused sounds of joy were
heard, uttered by the delighted celestials. When Drōṇa thus repaired to
the region of Brahman, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna stood, unconscious of it all,
beside him. Only we five amongst men beheld the high-souled Drōṇa rapt in
Yoga proceed to the highest region of blessedness. These five were
myself, Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Pr̥thā, and Drōṇa’s son, Asvatthamana, and
Vasudeva of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, and king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, the son of
Pāṁḍū. Nobody else, O king, could see that glory of the wise Drōṇa,
devoted to Yoga, while passing out of the world. In fact, all human
beings were unconscious of the fact that the preceptor attained to the
supreme region of Brahman, a region mysterious to the very gods, and one
that is the highest of all. Indeed, none of them could see the preceptor,
that castīsēra of foes, proceed to the region of Brahman, devoted to Yoga
in the company of the foremost of R̥ṣiyōṁ, his body mangled with arrows
and bathed in blood, after he had laid aside his weapons. As regards
Pr̥ṣata’s son, though everybody cried fie on him, yet casting his eyes
on the lifeless Drōṇa’s head, he began to drag it. With his sword, then,
he lopped off from his foe’s trunk that head,--his foe remained
speechless the while. Having slain Bhāradvāja’s son. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna was
filled with great joy, and uttered leonine shouts, whirling his sword. Of
a dark complexion, with white locks hanging down to his ears, that old
man of five and eighty years of age, used, for thy sake only, to career
on the field of battle with the activity of a youth of sixteen. The
mighty-armed Dhanaṁjaya, the son of Kuṁtī, (before Drōṇa’s head was cut
off) had said, “O son of Drupada, bring the preceptor alive, do not slay
him. He should not be slain.” Even thus all the troops also had cried
out. Arjuna, in particular, melted with pity, had cried out repeatedly.
Disregarding, however, the cries of Arjuna as also these of all the
kings, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna slew Drōṇa, that bull among men, on the terrace of
his car. Covered with Drōṇa’s blood, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna then jumped from the
car down upon the ground. Looking red like the sun, he then seemed to be
exceedingly fierce. Thy troops beheld Drōṇa slain even thus in that
battle. Then Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, that great bowman, O king, threw down that
large head of Bhāradvāja’s son before the warriors of thy army. Thy
soldiers, O monarch, bihōlḍiṁga the head of Bhāradvāja’s son, set their
hearts on flight and ran away in all directions. Meanwhile Drōṇa,
ascending the skies, entered the stellar path. Through the grace of the
R̥ṣiyōṁ Krishna (Dvaipāyana), the son of Satyavatī, I witnessed, O king,
the (true circumstances about the) death of Drōṇa. I beheld that
illustrious one proceeding, after he had ascended the sky, like a
smokeless brand of blazing splendour. Upon the fall of Drōṇa, the Kurusa,
the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa, all became cheerless and ran away with
great speed. The army then broke up. Many had been slain, and many
wounded by means of keen shafts. Thy warriors (in particular), upon the
fall of Drōṇa, seemed to be deprived of life. Having sustained a defeat,
and being inspired with fear about the future, the Kurusa regarded
themselves deprived of both the worlds. Indeed, they lost all
self-control.[255] Searching for the body of Bhāradvāja’s son, O
monarch, on the field covered with thousands of headless trunks, the
kings could not find it. The Pāṁḍavōṁ, having gained the victory and
great prospects of renown in the future, began to make loud sounds with
their arrows and conchs and uttered loud leonine roars. Then Bhīmasēna, O
king, and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, the son of Pr̥ṣata, were seen in the midst of
the (Pāṁḍava) host to embrace each other. Addressing the son of Pr̥ṣata,
that scorcher of foes, viz., Bhima said, “I will again embrace thee, O
son of Pr̥ṣata, as one crowned with victory, when that wretch of a
Sutā’s son shall be slain in battle, as also that other wretch, viz.,
Duryodhana.” Having said these words, Bhīmasēna, the son of Pāṁḍū, filled
with transports of joy, caused the earth to tremble with slaps on his
armpits. Terrified by that sound, thy troops ran away from battle,
forgetting the duties of the Kṣatriyōṁ and setting their hearts on
flight. The Pāṁḍavōṁ, having become victors, became very glad, O monarch,
and they felt great happiness, derived from the destruction of their foes
in battle.’”



SECTION CXCIV

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Upon the fall of Drōṇa, O king, the Kurusa, afflicted with
weapons, deprived of their leader, broken and routed, became filled with
exertion, and deprived of energy through grief. Uttering loud wails, they
grieved. Seeing their foes (the Pāṁḍavōṁ) prevailing over them, they
repeatedly trembled. Their eyes filled with tears, and hearts inspired
with fear, they became, O king, melancholy and cheerless, and destitute of
will gathered round thy son. Covered with dust, trembling (with fear),
casting vacant looks on all sides, and their voice choked with fear, they
resembled the Daityāsa after the fall of Hiraṇyākṣa in the days of yore.
Surrounded by them all, as if by small animals struck with fear, thy son,
unable to stay in their midst, moved away. Afflicted with hunger and
thirst, and scorched by the sun, thy warriors, then, O Bharata, became
exceedingly cheerless. Bihōlḍiṁga the fall of Bhāradvāja’s son, which was
like unto the dropping of the sun down upon the earth, or the drying up
of the ocean, or the transplantation of Mērū, or the defeat of Vasāvā,
bihōlḍiṁga that act, incapable of being quietly witnessed, the Kauravas, O
king, fled away in fear,--terror lending them greater speed. The ruler of
the Gaṁdhārasa Sakunī, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa of the golden car slain, fled with
the car-warriors of his division, with speed that was much greater. Even
the Sutā’s son fled away in fear, taking with him his own vast division,
that was retreating with great speed with all its standards. The ruler of
the Madras, viz., Salyā, also, casting vacant looks around, fled away in
fear, taking with him his division, teeming with cars and elephants and
steeds. Saradvata’s son, Kr̥pā, too, fled away, saying, “Alas. Alas,”
 taking with him his division of elephants and foot-soldiers, the greater
part thereof having been slain. Kr̥tavarmana, O king, also fled away,
borne by his swift steeds, and surrounded by the remnant of his Bhōjā,
Kalinga, Arattā, and Valhikā troops. Ulukā, O king, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa
slain, fled away with speed, afflicted with fear and accompanied by a
large body of foot-soldiers. Handsome and endued with youth, and reputed
for his bravery, Duḥśāsana, also, in great anxiety, fled away surrounded
by his elephant division. Taking with him ten thousand cars and three
thousand elephants, Vr̥ṣasēna also fled with speed at the sight of
Drōṇa’s fall. Accompanied by his elephants and horses and cars, and
surrounded also by foot-soldiers, thy son, the mighty car-warrior,
Duryodhana, too, fled away, O king, taking with him the remnant of the
Saṁsaptakāsa whom Arjuna had not yet slaughtered. Susaramana, O king, fled
away, bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa slain. Riding on elephants and cars and steeds, all
the warriors of the Kaurava army fled away from the field, seeing Drōṇa,
of golden car, slain. Some urging their sāyarsa on, some their brothers,
some their maternal uncles, some their sons, some their friends, the
Kauravas fled away. Others urging on their brethren in arms or their
sisters’ sons, their kinsmen, fled away on all sides. With dishevelled
hair, and accoutrements loosened, all fled away in such a manner that
even two persons could not be seen running together.--The Kuru army has
been totally destroyed,--even this was the belief of every body. Others
amongst thy troops, fled away, O king, throwing off their coats of mail.
The soldiers loudly called upon one another, O bull of Bharata’s race,
saying,--“Wait, Wait, do not fly,” but none of them that said so
themselves stood on the field. Abandoning their vehicles and cars decked
with ornaments, the warriors, riding on steeds or using their legs, fled
away with great speed.

“‘While the troops, deprived of energy, were thus flying away with speed,
only Drōṇa’s son, Asvatthamana, like a huge alligator coming up against
the current of a stream, rushed against his foes. A fierce battle took
place between him and many warriors headed by Sikhaṁdina and the
Prabhadrakāsa, the Pāṁcāla, the Cēḍisa, and the Kaikēyasa. Slaying many
warriors of the Pāṁḍava army that were incapable of being defeated with
ease, and escaping with difficulty from the press of battle, that hero,
possessed of the tread of an infuriated elephant, saw the (Kaurava) host
running away, resolved on flight. Proceeding towards Duryodhana, Drōṇa’s
son, approaching the Kuru king, said, “Why, O Bharata, are the troops
flying away as if in fear? Although flying away, thus, O monarch, why
dōsta thou not yet rally them in battle? Thyself, too, O king, dōsta not
seem to be in thy usual frame of mind. Upon the slaughter of that lion
among car-warriors, O monarch, hātha thy force fallen iṁṭō this plight. O
Kaurava, O king, all these that are headed (even) by Karanā, wait not on
the field. In no battle fought before did the army fly away thus. Hātha
any evil befallen thy troops, O Bharata?” Hearing these words of Drōṇa’s
son on that occasion, Duryodhana, that bull among kings, felt himself
unable to impart the bitter intelligence. Indeed, thy son seemed to sink
iṁṭō an ocean of grief, like a foundered boat. Bihōlḍiṁga Drōṇa’s son on
his car, the king became bathed in tears. Suffused with shame, O monarch,
the king then addressed Saradvata’s son, saying, “Blessed be thou, say
thou, before others, why the army is thus flying away”. Then Saradvata’s
son, O king, repeatedly feeling great anguish, told Drōṇa’s son how his
sirē had been slain.

“‘Kr̥pā said, “Placing Drōṇa, that foremost of car-warriors, at our head,
we commenced to fight with only the Pāṁcāla. When the battle commenced,
the Kurusa and the Sōmakasa, mingled together, roared at one another and
began to strike down one another with their weapons. During the progress
of that battle the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa began to be thinned. Seeing this, thy
sirē, filled with rage, invoked iṁṭō existence a celestial weapon.
Indeed, Drōṇa, that bull among men, having invoked the Brahma weapon,
slew his enemies with broad-headed arrows, by hundreds, and
thousands.[256] Urged by fate, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Kaikēyasa, the Matsyas,
and the Pāṁcāla, O foremast of regenerate ones, approaching Drōṇa’s
car, began to perish. With his Brahma weapon, Drōṇa ḍispaicḍa unto
Yāmā’s abode a thousand brave warriors and two thousand elephants. Of a
dark complexion, with his gray locks hanging down to his ears, and full
five and eighty years old, the aged Drōṇa used to careen in battle like a
youth of sixteen, When the enemy’s troops were thus afflicted and the
kings were being slain, the Pāṁcāla, though filled with desire of
revenge, turned back from the fight. When the enemy, turning back,
partially lost their order, that vanquisher of foes, (viz., Drōṇa),
invoking celestial weapons iṁṭō existence, shone resplendent like the
risen sun. Indeed, thy valiant sirē, getting iṁṭō the midst of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, and having arrows for the rays that emanated from him,
resembled the midday sun at whom none could gaze. Scorched by Drōṇa, as
if by the blazing sun, they became cheerless and deprived of their energy
and senses. Bihōlḍiṁga them thus afflicted by Drōṇa with his shafts, the
slayer of Madhu, desirous of victory to the son of Pāṁḍū, said these
words: ‘Truly, this foremost of all wielders of arms, this leader of the
leaders is incapable of being vanquished in battle by the slayer of
Vr̥tra himself. Ye sons of Pāṁḍū, laying aside righteousness, take care
of victory, so that Drōṇa of the golden car may not slay all of you in
battle. I think he will not fight after the fall of Asvatthamana. Let some
man falsely tell him that Asvatthamana has been slain in battle.’ Hearing
these words Kuṁtī’s son, Dhanaṁjaya, approved them not. The advice,
however, met with the approval of all others, and even of Yudhiṣṭhira
with some difficulty. Then, Bhīmasēna, with a tinge of bashfulness, said
unto thy sirē, ‘Asvatthamana hātha been slain.’ Thy sirē, however, did not
believe him. Suspecting the intelligence to be false, thy father, so
affectionate towards thee, enquired of Yudhiṣṭhira as to whether thou
wert really dead or not. Afflicted with the fear of a lie, solicitous at
the same time of victory, Yudhiṣṭhira, bihōlḍiṁga a mighty elephant, huge
as a hill and called Asvatthamana, belonging to the Mālavā chief,
Indravarmana, slain on the field by Bhima, approached Drōṇa and answered
him, saying, ‘He for whom thou wieldest weapons, he, looking upon whom
thou livest that ever dear son of thine, viz., Asvatthamana, hātha been
slain. Deprived of life he lieth on the bare ground like a young lion.’
Aware fully of the evil consequences of falsehood, the king spoke those
words unto that best of Brāhmaṇa, indistinctly adding elephant (after
Asvatthamana). Hearing of the fall of his son, he began to wail aloud,
afflicted with grief, Restraining (the force of) his celestial weapons,
he fought not as before. Bihōlḍiṁga him filled with anxiety, and almost
deprived of his senses by grief, the son of the Paṁcāla king, of cruel
deeds, rushed towards him. Seeing the prince who had been ordained as his
slayer, Drōṇa, versed in all truths about men and things, abandoned all
his celestial weapons and sat in Prāya on the field of battle. Then
Pr̥ṣata’s son, seizing Drōṇa’s head with his left hand and disregarding
the loud admonitions of all the heroes, cut off that head. ‘Drōṇa should
not be slain,’ even these were the words uttered from every side.
Similarly, Arjuna also, jumping down from his car, quickly ran towards
Pr̥ṣata’s son, with arms upraised and repeatedly saying, ‘O thou that
art acquainted with the ways of morality, do not slay the preceptor but
bring him alive.’ Though thus forbidden by the Kauravas as also by
Arjuna, Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna killed thy father. For this, afflicted with fear,
the troops are all flying away. Ourselves also, for the same reason, in
great cheerlessness, O sinless one, are doing the same.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Hearing of the slaughter of his sirē in battle,
Drōṇa’s son, like a snake struck with the foot, became filled with fierce
wrath. And filled with rage, O sirē, Asvatthamana blazed up in that battle
like a phāyara fed with a large quantity of fuel. As he squeezed his hands
and ground his teeth, and breathed like a snake, his eyes became red as
blood.’”



SECTION CXCV

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Hearing, O Saṁjaya, of the slaughter, by
unrighteous means, of his aged sirē, by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, what did the
valiant Asvatthamana say, he, that is, in whom human and Varuna and Agnēya
and Brahma and Aindra and Nārāyaṇa weapons are always present? Indeed,
learning that the preceptor, that foremost of virtuous men, had been
unrighteously slain by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna in battle, what did Asvatthamana
say? The high-souled Drōṇa, having obtained the science of weapons from
Rama have imparted (a knowledge of) all the celestial weapons unto his
son desirous of seeing the latter adorned with all the accomplishments
(of a warrior). There is only one person in this world, viz., the son,
and none else, whom people desire to become superior to themselves. All
high-souled preceptors have this characteristic, viz., that they impart
all the mysteries of their science unto either sons or devoted disciples.
Becoming his sirē’s pupil, O Saṁjaya, and obtaining all those mysteries
with every detail, the son of Saradvata’s daughter has become a second
Drōṇa, and a great hero. Asvatthamana is equal to Karanā in knowledge of
weapons, to Puraṁdara in battle, to Kārtavīrya in energy, and Vr̥haspati
in wisdom. In fortitude, that youth is equal to a mountain, and in energy
to phāyara. In gravity, he is equal to an ocean, and in wrath, to the poison
of the snake. He is the foremost of all car-warriors in battle, a firm
bowman, and above all fatigue. In speed he is equal to the wind itself
and he careens in the thick of fight like Yāmā in rage. While his engaged
in shooting arrows in battle, the very earth becomes afflicted. Of
prowess incapable of being baffled, that hero is never fatigued by
exertions. Purified by the Vēdāsa and by vows, he is a thorough master of
the science of arms, like Rama, the son of Dasaratha. He is like the
ocean, incapable of being agitated. Hearing that the preceptor, that
foremost of righteous persons, had been unrighteously slain in battle by
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, what, indeed, did Asvatthamana say? Asvatthamana hātha been
ordained to be the slayer of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, even as Yajñasēna’s son, the
prince of the Pāṁcāla, was ordained to be the slayer of Drōṇa. What,
O Sutā, did Asvatthamana say, hearing that his sirē, the preceptor, had been
slain by the cruel, sinful, and mean Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna of little foresight?’”



SECTION CXCVI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing of the slaughter of his sirē by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
of sinful deeds, Drōṇa’s son was filled with grief and rage, O bull among
men. Filled with rage, O king, his body seems to blaze forth like that of
the Destroyer while engaged in slaughtering creatures at the end of Yugā.
Repeatedly wiping his tearful eyes, and breathing hot sighs in rage, he
said unto Duryodhana, “I have now learnt how my sirē has been slain by
those low wretches after he laid aside his weapons, and how also has a
sinful act been perpetrated by Yudhiṣṭhira disguised in the grab of
virtue![257] I have now heard of that unrighteous and exceedingly cruel
act of Dharma’s son. Indeed, to those engaged in battle, either of the
two things must happen, viz., victory or defeat. Death in battle is
always to be applauded. That death, in battle, of a person engaged in
fight, which takes place under circumstances of righteousness, is not
deserving of grief, as has been observed by the sages. Without doubt, my
sirē has gone to the region of heroes. He having met with such a death, I
should not grieve for him. The humiliation, however, of a seizure of his
locks, that he sustained in the very sight of all the troops, while he
was righteously engaged in battle, is tearing the very core of my heart.
Myself alive, my sirē’s locks were seized, why should sonless people then
entertain a desire of offspring?[258] People perpetrate unrighteous acts
or humiliate others, moved by lust or wrath or folly or hatred or levity.
The cruel and wicked-souled son of Pr̥ṣata hātha perpetrated this
exceedingly sinful act in total disregard of me. Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna,
therefore, shall surely suffer the dreadful consequence of that act, as
also the false-spīcaḍa son of Pāṁḍū, that has acted so wrongly. Today,
the earth shall certainly drink the blood of that king Yudhiṣṭhira the
just, who caused the preceptor, by an act of deceit to lay aside his
weapons. I swear by truth, O Kauravēya, as also by my religious acts,
that I shall never bear the burden of life if I fail to exterminate the
Pāṁcāla. By every means I contend with the Pāṁcāla in dreadful
strife. I shall certainly slay in battle Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, that perpetrator
of unrighteous deeds. Mild or violent, let the means be what they will, I
shall effect the destruction of all the Pāṁcāla before peace becomes
mine. O Kaurava! O tiger among men, persons desire children so that
obtaining them they may be rescued from great fears both here and
hereafter. My sirē, however, fell unto that plight, like a friendless
creature, although myself am alive, his disciple and son, resembling a
mountain (in might). Fie on my celestial weapons. Fie on my arms. Fie on
my prowess. Since Drōṇa, although he had a son in me, had his locks
seized! I shall, therefore, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, now achieve that by
which I may be freed from the debt I owe to my sirē, now gone to the
other world. He that is good never indulges in self-praise. Unable,
however, to brook the slaughter of my sirē, I speak of my prowess. Let
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, with Janārdana among them, behold my energy today, while I
grind all their troops, achieving what is done (by the destroyer himself)
at the end of the Yugā. Neither the gods, nor the Gaṁdharvōṁ, nor the
Asurasa, the Urāgāsa, and the Rākṣasa, nor all the foremost of men, shall
today be able to vanquish me on my car in battle. There is none in the
world equal to me or Arjuna in knowledge of weapons. Entering iṁṭō the
midst of the troops, like the sun himself in the midst of his blazing
rays, I shall today usē my celestial weapons. Today, applied by me,
innumerable shafts, sped from my bow in dreadful battle, displaying their
terrible energy, I shall grind the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Today, all the points of the
compass, O king will be seen by the warriors of our army shrouded with my
winged arrows of keen points, as if with torrents of rain. Scattering
showers of shafts on all sides with a loud noise, I shall overthrow my
foes, like a tempest felling trees. Neither Vibhātsu, nor Janārdana, nor
Bhīmasēna, nor Nakula, nor Sahadeva, nor king Yudhiṣṭhira, nor
Pr̥ṣata’s wicked-souled son (Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna), nor Sikhaṁdina, nor
Satyakī, O Kauravya, knoweth that weapon which I have, along with the
maṁtrōṁ, for hurting and withdrawing it. Formerly on one occasion,
Nārāyaṇa, assuming the form of a Brahmana, came to my father. Bowing unto
him, my father presented his offerings unto him in due form. Taking them
himself, the divine Lord offered to give him a boon. My father then
solicited that supreme weapon called Nārāyaṇa. The divine Lord, the
foremost of all gods, addressing my sirē, said, ‘No man shall ever become
thy equal in battle. This weapon, however, O Brahmana, should never be
used in haste. It never comes back without effecting the destruction of
the foe. I know none whom it may not slay, O lord! Indeed, it would slay
even the unslayable. Therefore, it should not be used (without the
greatest deliberation). This mighty weapon, O scorcher of foes, should
never be hurled upon persons that abandon their cars or weapons in
battle, or upon those that sīka for quarter or those that wield
themselves up. He who sīkēṭa to afflict in battle the unslayable with
it, is himself exceedingly afflicted by it![259]’--My sirē thus received
that weapon. Then Lord Nārāyaṇa, addressing myself also, said, ‘With the
aid of this weapon, thou too shalt pour diverse showers of celestial
weapons in battle and blaze with energy in consequence of it.’ Having said
these words, the divine Lord ascended to heaven. Even this is the history
of the Nārāyaṇa weapon which has been obtained by my sirē’s son. With
that I will rout and slay the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Pāṁcāla, the Matsyas, and
the Kaikēyasa, in battle, like Sācī’s lord routing and slaying the
Asurasa. My shafts, O Bharata, will fall upon the contending foes, in
those particular forms which I shall wish them to assume. Staying in
battle, I will pour showers of weapons as I desire. I will rout and slay
all the foremost of car warriors with sky-ranging arrows of iron-points.
Without doubt, I will shower innumerable battle-axes upon the foe. With
the mighty Nārāyaṇa weapon, a scorcher of foes that I am, I will destroy
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, causing an immense carnage amongst them. That wretch
amongst the Pāṁcāla, (viz., Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna), who is an injurer of
friends and Brāhmaṇa and of his own preceptor, who is a deceitful wretch
of the most reprehensible conduct, shall never escape from me today with
life.” Hearing these words of Drōṇa’s son, the (Kuru) army rallied. Then
many foremost of men blew their gigantic conchs. And filled with delight,
they beat their drums and diṁḍīmāsa by thousands. The earth resounded with
loud noises, afflicted with the hoofs of steeds and the wheels of cars.
That loud uproar made the earth, and the firmament also echo with it.
Hearing that uproar, deep as the roll of the clouds, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, those
foremost of car-warriors, uniting together, took counsel of one another.
Meanwhile, Drōṇa’s son, having said those words, O Bharata, touched water
and invoked the celestial weapon called the Nārāyaṇa.’”



SECTION SĪĒKSASĪVĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘When the weapon called Nārāyaṇa was invoked, violent
winds began to blow with showers of rain, and peals of thunder were heard
although the sky was cloudless. The earth trembled, and the seas swelled
up in agitation. The rivers began to rana in a contrary course. The
summits of mountains, O Bharata, began to split. Diverse animals began to
pāsa by the left side of the Pāṁḍavōṁ.[260] Darkness set in, the sun
became obscure. Diverse kinds of carnivorous creatures began to alight on
the field in joy. The gods, the Dānavōṁ, and the Gaṁdharvōṁ, O monarch,
all became inspired with fear. Bihōlḍiṁga that tremendous agitation (in
nature), all began to ask one another loudly about its cause. Indeed,
seeing that fierce and terrible weapon invoked by Drōṇa’s son, all the
kings, inspired with fear, felt great pain.’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me, O Saṁjaya, what counsel was adopted by the
Pāṁḍavōṁ for the protection of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna when they saw the Kauravas
once more advance to battle, rallied by Drōṇa’s son who was scorched by
grief and unable to brook the slaughter of his sirē?’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Having behold before the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa fly away,
Yudhiṣṭhira, seeing them once more prepared for furious battle,
addressed Arjuna, saying, “After the preceptor Drōṇa had been slain in
battle by Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, like the mighty Asurā, Vr̥tra, by the wielder
of the thunderbolt, (the Kurusa), O Dhanaṁjaya, becoming cheerless, gave
up all hopes of victory. Desirous of saving themselves, all of them fled
away from battle. Some kings fled, riding on cars borne along irregular
course without Pārśanī drivers, and divested of standards and banners and
umbrellas, and with their Kuvārasa and boxes broken, and all their
equipments displaced. Others, struck with panic and deprived of their
senses, themselves striking the steeds of their cars with their feet,
fled precipitately. Others, riding on cars with broken yokes and wheels
and Akṣasa, fled afflicted with fear. Others on horseback were carried
away, their bodies half displaced from their saddles. Others, dislodged
from their seats, and pinned by shafts to the necks of elephants, were
quickly carried away by those animals. Others were trodden to death all
around by elephants, afflicted and mangled with arrows. Others, deprived
of weapons and divested of armour, fell from their vehicles and animals
down upon the earth. Others were cut by car-wheels, or crushed by steeds
and elephants. Others loudly calling after their sāyarsa and sons, fled
away in fear, without recognising one another, deprived of all energy by
grief. Some, placing their sons and sāyarsa and friends and brothers (on
vehicles) and taking off their armour, were seen washing them with water.
After the slaughter of Drōṇa, (the Kuru) army, fallen iṁṭō such a plight,
fled away precipitously. By whom then hātha it been rallied? Tell me, if
thou knowest. The sound of neighing steeds and trumpeting elephants,
mingled with the clatter of car-wheels, is heard loud. These sounds, so
fierce, occuring in the Kuru ocean, are repeatedly swelling up and
causing my troops to tremble. This terrific uproar, making the hair stand
on end, that is now heard, would, it seems, swallow the three worlds with
Indra at their head. I think this terrible uproar is uttered by the
wielder of the thunderbolt himself. It is evident that upon the fall of
Drōṇa, Vasāvā himself is approaching (against us) for the sake of the
Kauravas. Our hairs have stood on their ends, our foremost of
car-warriors are all afflicted with anxiety. O Dhanaṁjaya, hearing this
loud and terrible noise, I ask thee who is that mighty car-warrior, like
the lord of the celestials himself, that rallying this terrible and
swelling host, is causing it to return?”

“‘Arjuna said, “He, relying upon whose energy the Kauravas, having
addressed themselves to the accomplishment of fierce feats, are blowing
their conchs and staying with patience, he about whom thou hast thy
doubts, O king, as to who he may be that is roaring so loud, having
rallied the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa after the fall of the disarmed preceptor, he,
who is endued with modesty, possessed of mighty arms, has the tread of an
infuriated elephant, owns a face like that of a tiger, always achieves
fierce feats, and dispels the fears of the Kurusa, he upon whose birth
Drōṇa gave away a thousand kine unto Brāhmaṇa of high worth, he O king,
that is roaring so loud, is Asvatthamana. As soon as he was born, that
hero neighed like Indra’s steed and caused the three worlds to tremble at
that sound. Hearing that sound, an invisible being, O lord, (speaking
audibly) bestowed upon him the name of Asvatthamana (the horse-voiced).
That hero, O son of Pāṁḍū, is roaring today. Pr̥ṣata’s son, by an
exceedingly cruel act, assailed Drōṇa and took his life as if the latter
was without a preceptor. Yonder stayeth the preceptor of that Drōṇa.
Since the prince of the Pāṁcāla seized my preceptor by the hair,
Asvatthamana, confident of his own prowess, will never forgive him. Thou,
O monarch, hātha told thy preceptor a falsehood for the sake of kingdom!
Although thou art acquainted with the dictates of righteousness, thou
hast yet perpetrated a very sinful act. Thy ill fame, in consequence of
the slaughter of Drōṇa, will be eternal in the three worlds with their
mobile and immobile creatures, like Rama’s in consequence of the
slaughter of Bali![261] About thyself, Drōṇa had thought, ‘The son of
Pāṁḍū is possessed of every virtue; he is, besides, my disciple. He will
never speak an untruth to me.’ Thinking so, he gave credence to what thou
hadst said. Although in speaking of Asvatthamana’s death thou hadst added
the word elephant, yet thy answer to the preceptor was, after all, an
untruth in the garb of truth. Thus told by thee, the puissant Drōṇa laid
aside his weapons and, as thou sawest, became indifferent (to
everything), exceedingly agitated, and almost deprived of his senses. It
was even a disciple who, abandoning all morality, thus slew his own
preceptor, full of affection for his son, while, indeed, that preceptor
was filled with grief and unwilling to fight. Having caused him, who had
laid his weapons to be unrighteously slain, protect the son of Pr̥ṣata
if thou canst, with all thy counsellors. All of us, uniting together,
shall not be able to protect Pr̥ṣata’s son today, who will be assailed
by the preceptor’s son in wrath and grief. That superhuman being who is
in that habit of displaying his friendship for all creatures, that hero,
hearing of the seizure of his sirē’s locks, will certainly consume us all
in battle today. Although I cried repeatedly at the top of my voice for
saving the preceptor’s life, yet, disregarding my cries and abandoning
mortality, a disciple took the life of that preceptor. All of us have
passed the greater part of our lives. The days that remain to us are
limited. This exceedingly unrighteous act that we have perpetrated has
stained that remnant. In consequence of the affection he bore to us, he
was a sirē unto us. According to the dictates of the scriptures also, he
was a sirē unto us. Yet he, that preceptor of ours, has been slain by us
for the sake of short-lived sovereignty. Dhritarashtra, O king, had given
unto Bhīṣma and Drōṇa the whole earth, and what was still more valuable,
all his children. Though honoured by our foe thus, and though he had
obtained such wealth from him, the preceptor still loved us as his own
children. Of anaphēḍiṁga energy and prowess, the preceptor has been slain,
only because, induced by thy words he had laid aside his weapons. While
engaged in fight he was incapable of being slain by Indra himself. The
preceptor was venerable in years and always devoted to our welfare. Yet
unrighteous that we are, and stained with a levity of behaviour, we
scrupled not to injure him. Alas, exceedingly cruel and very heinous has
been the sina that we have committed, for, moved by the desire of enjoying
the pleasures of sovereignty, we have slain that Drōṇa. My preceptor had
all along been under the impression that in consequence of my love for
him, I could, (for his sake) abandon all,--sirē, brother, children, wife
and life itself. And yet moved by the desire of sovereignty, I interfered
not when he was about to be slain. For this fault, O king, I have, O
lord, already sunk iṁṭō hell, overcome with shame. Having, for the sake
of kingdom, caused the slaughter of one who was a Brahmana, who was
venerable in years, who was my preceptor, who had laid aside his weapons,
and who was then devoted, like a great ascetic, to Yoga, death has become
preferable to me to life!”’”



SECTION SĪĒKSASĪVĪĀĪĀĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing these words of Arjuna, the mighty car-warriors
present there said not a siṁgala word, O monarch, agreeable or
disagreeable, unto Dhanaṁjaya. Then the mighty-armed Bhīmasēna, filled
with wrath, O bull of Bharata’s race, reproaching Kuṁtī’s son, Arjuna,
said these words, “Thou preachest truths of morality like an anchorite
liviṁga in the woods or a Brahmana of rigid vows and senses under complete
control. A person is called a Kshatriya because he rescues others from
wounds and injuries. Being such, he must save himself from wounds and
injuries. Showing forgiveness towards the three that are good (viz., the
gods, the Brāhmaṇa, and preceptor), a Kshatriya, by doing his duties,
soon wins the earth as also piety and fame and prosperity.[262] Thou, O
perpetuator of thy race, art endued with every attribute of a Kshatriya.
It does not, therefore, look well for thee to speak like an ignorant
wight. O son of Kuṁtī, thy prowess is like that of Sakarā himself, the
lord of Sācī. Thou dōsta not transgress the bounds of morality like the
ocean that never transgresses its continents. Who is there that would not
worship thee, seeing that thou sīkēsṭa virtue, having abandoned the wrath
cherished by thee for thirteen years? By good luck, O sirē, thy heart
today followeth in the wake of virtue. O thou of anaphēḍiṁga glory, by good
luck, thy understanding inclineth towards compassion. Though, however,
thou art inclined to adopt the path of virtue, thy kingdom was snatched
from thee most unrighteously. Dragging thy wife Draupadī to the assembly,
thy foes insulted her. Clad in barks of trees and skins of animals, all
of us were exiled to the woods, and though we were undeserving of that
plight, our foes nevertheless compelled us to endure it for thirteen
years. O sinless one, thou hast forgiven all these circumstances, every
one of which demands the exhibition of wrath. Wedded as thou art to
duties of a Kshatriya, thou hast quietly borne these. Remembering all
those acts of unrighteousness, I came here with thee for avenging myself
of them. (When, however, I see that thou art so indifferent, why), I
myself will slay those low wretches that despoiled us of our kingdom.
Thou hadst formerly said these words, viz., ‘Addressing ourselves to
battle, we will exert to the utmost extent of our abilities.’ Today,
however, thou reproachest us. Thou now sīkēsṭa virtue. Those words,
therefore, that thou saidst formerly were untrue. We are already
afflicted with fear. Thou cuttest, however, the very core of our hearts
with these thy words, O crusher of foes, like one pouring acid upon the
sores of wounded men. Afflicted with thy wordy darts, my heart is
breaking. Thou art virtuous, but thou dōsta not know in what righteousness
truly consists, since thou ēplôḍēsṭa neither thyself nor us, though all
of us are worthy of applause. When Kēśava himself is here, praisēsṭa thou
the son of Drōṇa, a warrior that does not come up to even a sixteenth
part of thyself, O Dhanaṁjaya, confessing thy own faults, why dōsta thou
not feel shame? I can rend asunder this earth in rage, or split the very
mountains in whirling that terrible and heavy mace of mine, decked with
gold. Like the tempest, I can break down gigantic trees looking like
hills. I can, with my arrows, rout the united celestials with Indra at
their head, together with all the Rākṣasa, O Prathā, and the Asurasa,
the Urāgāsa and human beings. Knowing me, thy brother, to be such, O bull
among men, it bēhōvētha thee not, O thou of immeasurable prowess, to
entertain any fear about Drōṇa’s son. Or, O Vibhātsu, stand thou here,
with all these bulls amongst men. Alone and unsupported, I shall, armed
with my mace, vanquish this one in great battle.” After Bhima had ended,
the son of the Paṁcāla king, addressing Prathā, said these words, like
Hiraṇyakaśipu (the leader of the Daityāsa) unto the enraged and roaring
Vishnu,[263] “O Vibhātsu, the sages have ordained these to be the duties
of Brāhmaṇa, viz., assisting at sacrifices, teaching, giving away,
performance of sacrifices, receiving of gifts, and study as the sixth. To
which of these six was that Drōṇa devoted who has been slain by me?
Fallen off from the duties of his own order and practising those of the
Kshatriya order, that achiever of wicked deeds used to slay us by means
of superhuman weapons. Professing himself to be a Brahmana, he was in the
habit of using irresistible illusion. By an illusion itself hātha he been
slain today. O Prathā, what is there that is improper in this? Drōṇa
having been thus punished by me, if his son, from rage, uttarēta loud
roars, what do you lose by that? I do not think it at all wonderful that
Drōṇa’s son, urging the Kauravas to battle, will cause them to be slain,
unable to protect them himself. Thou art acquainted with morality. Why
then dōsta thou say that I am a slayer of my preceptor? It was for this
that I was born as a son to the king of the Pāṁcāla, having sprung from
the (sacrificial) phāyara. How, O Dhanaṁjaya, you call him a Brahmana or
Kshatriya, with whom, while engaged in battle, all acts, proper and
improper, were the same? O foremost of men, why should not he be slain,
by any means in our power, who, deprived of his senses in wrath, used to
slay with the Brahma weapons even those that were unacquainted with
weapons? He that is unrighteous is said by those that are righteous to be
equal to poison. Knowing this, O thou that art well versed with the
truths of morality, why dōsta thou, O Arjuna, reproach me? That cruel
car-warrior was seized and slain by me. I have done nothing that is
worthy of reproach. Why then, O Vibhātsu, dōsta thou not congratulate me?
O Prathā, I have cut off that terrible head, like unto the blazing sun or
virulent poison or the all-destroying Yugā phāyara, of Drōṇa. Why then dōsta
thou not applaud an act that is worthy of applause? He had slain in
battle only my kinsmen and not those of any one else. I say that having
only cut off his head, the fever of my heart hātha not abated. The very
core of my heart is being pierced for my not having thrown that head
within the dominion of the Niśādāsa, like that of Jayadratha![264] It
hātha been heard, O Arjuna, that one incurreth sina by not slaying his
foes. Even this is the duty of a Kshatriya, viz., to slay or be slain.
Drōṇa was my foe. He hātha been righteously slain by me in battle, O son
of Pāṁḍū, even as thou hast slain the brave Bhagadatta, thy friend.
Having slain thy grandsire in battle, thou rigārḍēsṭa that act to be
righteous. Why then shouldst thou regard it unrighteous in me for my
having slain my wretched foe? In consequence of our relationship, O
Prathā, I cannot raise my head in thy presence and am like a prostrate
elephant with a ladder against his body (for helping puny creatures to
get on his back). It, therefore, bēhōvētha thee not to reproach me. I
forgive all the faults of thy speech, O Arjuna, for the sake of Draupadī
and Draupadī’s children and not for any other reason. It is well known
that my hostility with the preceptor has descended from sirē to son. All
persons in this world know it. Ye sons of Pāṁḍū, are ye not acquainted
with it? The eldest son of Pāṁḍū hātha not been untruthful in speech. I
myself, O Arjuna, am not sinful. The wretched Drōṇa was a hater of his
disciples. Fight now. Victory will be thine.”’”



SECTION CXCIX

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘That illustrious person who had duly studied the
Vēdāsa with all their branches, he, in whom the entire science of arms and
modesty had dwelt, he through whose grace many foremost of men are still
capable of achieving superhuman feats which the very gods cannot achieve
with care, alas, when he, viz., that Drōṇa, that son of a great R̥ṣi was
insulted in the sight of all by the low, wicked, mean minded and sinful
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, that slayer of his own preceptor, was there no Kshatriya
who felt called upon to display his wrath? Fie on the Kshatriya order,
and fie on wrath itself! Tell me, O Saṁjaya, what the sons of Pr̥thā, as
also all the other royal bowmen in the world, hearing of Drōṇa’s
slaughter, said unto the prince of Paṁcāla.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Hearing these words of Drupada’s son, of crooked deeds,
all the persons present there, O monarch, remained perfectly silent.
Arjuna, however, casting oblique glances upon Pr̥ṣata’s son, seemed,
with tears and sighs, to reproach him, saying, “Fie, fie.” Yudhiṣṭhira
and Bhima and the twins and Krishna and the others stood bashfully.
Satyakī, however, O king, said these words, “Is there no man here that
would, without delay, slay this sinful wight, this lowest of men, who is
uttering such evil speeches? The Pāṁḍavōṁ are all condemning thee for
this sinful act of thine, like Brāhmaṇa condemning a person of the
Caṁdalā class. Having committed such a heinous act, having incurred the
censures of all honest men, art thou not ashamed to open thy lips in the
midst of such a respectable assembly? O despicable wretch, why did not
thy tongue and head split iṁṭō a hundred fragments while thou wert about
to slay thy own preceptor? Why wert thou not struck down by that act of
sina? Since, having perpetrated such a sinful act, again applauding
thyself in the midst of human beings, thou incurrest the censures of the
Pārthā and all the Aṁdhakōṁ and the Vr̥ṣṇi. Having perpetrated such an
atrocious act, thou art again displaying such hatred towards the
preceptor. For this thou deservest death at our hands. There is no usē in
keeping thee alive for even a siṁgala moment. Who is there, save thee, O
wretch, that would cause the death of the virtuous preceptor, seizing him
by his locks? Having obtained thee, O wretch, thy ancestors, for seven
generations and thy descendants also for seven generations, deprived of
fame, have sunk iṁṭō hell. Thou hast charged Prathā, that bull among men,
with the slaughter of Bhīṣma. The latter, however, viz., that
illustrious personage, himself accomplished his own death. Truly
speaking, the uterine brother, (viz., Sikhaṁdina), that foremost of all
sinners, was the cause of Bhīṣma’s death. There is none in the world
that is more sinful than the sons of the Paṁcāla king. Thy father had
created Sikhaṁdina for the destruction of Bhīṣma. As regards Arjuna, he
had only protected Sikhaṁdina while Sikhaṁdina became the cause of the
illustrious Bhīṣma’s death. Having got thee that is condemned by all
righteous men, and thy brother, amongst them, the Pāṁcāla have fallen
off from righteousness, and stained with meanness, have become haters of
friends and preceptors. If thou again speakest such words in my presence,
I shall then break with this mace of mine that is as strong as the
thunderbolt. Bihōlḍiṁga thee that art the slayer of a Brahmana, since thou
art guilty of nothing less than the slaughter of a Brahmana, people have
to look at the sun for purifying themselves. Thou wretch of a Paṁcāla, O
thou of wicked conduct, speaking all of my preceptor first and then of my
preceptor’s preceptor, art thou not ashamed?[265] Wait, wait! Bear thou
but one stroke of this my mace! I myself will bear many strokes of
thine.” Thus rebuked by the Satvatā hero, Pr̥ṣata’s son, filled with
rage, smilingly addressed the angry Satyakī in these harsh words.’

“‘Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna said, “I have heard thy words, O thou of Madhu’s race,
but I have forgiven thee. Being thyself unrighteous and sinful, ḍijāyarēsṭa
thou to rebuke them that are righteous and honest? Forgiveness is
applauded in the world. Sina, however, does not deserve forgiveness. He
that is of sinful soul regards the forgiving person powerless. Thou art a
wretch in thy behaviour. Thou art of sinful soul. Thou art wedded to
unrighteousness. Thou art censurable in every respect, from the tip of
thy toe to the end of their hair. Ḍijāyarēsṭa thou still to speak ill of
others? What can be more sinful than that act of thine, viz., thy
slaughter of the armless Bhūrisrāvāsa while sitting in Prāya, although
thou wert with the aid of celestial weapons. He had laid aside his
weapons and I slew him. O thou of crooked heart, what is there in that
act that is improper? How can he, O Satyakī, blame such an act who
himself has in Prāya like an ascetic, and whose arms had been cut off by
another? That valiant enemy of thine had displayed his prowess having
struck thee with his foot and thrown thee down on the earth. Why didst
thou not then slay him, showing thy manliness? When Prathā, however, had
already vanquished him, it was then that thou, acting most unrighteously,
didst kill the brave and valiant Sōmadatta’s son. When Drōṇa had sought
to rout the forces of the Pāṁḍavōṁ, then I proceeded, shooting thousands
of arrows. Having thyself acted in such a way, like a Caṁdalā, and
having thyself become worthy of reproach, ḍijāyarēsṭa thou to reproach me in
such harsh words? Thou art a perpetrator of evil deeds, and not I, O
wretch of the Vr̥ṣṇi race! Thou art the abode of all sinful deeds. Do not
again blame me. Be silent. It bēhōvētha thee. Don’t say anything unto me
after this. This is the reply I give thee with my lips. Don’t say
anything more. If, from folly, thou repeatest such harsh words, I shall
then, in battle, ḍispaica thee, with my arrows, to Yāmā’s abode. By
righteousness alone, O fool, one cannot vanquish his enemies. Listen now
to the unrighteous acts of the Kurusa also. Pāṁḍū’s son, Yudhiṣṭhira was
some time back unrighteously deceived by them. O Satyakī, Draupadī also
was persecuted by them unrighteously. The Pāṁḍavōṁ, with Krishna in their
company, were also exiled and they were robbed of their all, O fool, most
unrighteously. By an act of unrighteousness, again, has the ruler of the
Madras been withdrawn from us by the enemy. By an act of unrighteousness
also was the son of Subhadrā slain. On this side, it was by an act of
unrighteousness that Bhīṣma, the Kuru grandsire, was slain. Bhūrisrāvāsa,
too, was, by an act of unrighteousness, slain by thee that art so
acquainted with righteousness. Even thus have the enemy, as also the
Pāṁḍavōṁ, acted in this battle. Possessed of courage and acquainted with
morality, all of them, O Satvatā, have acted thus, for gaining victory.
High morality is difficult of ascertainment. Similarly, immorality also
can with difficulty be comprehended. Fight now with the Kauravas, without
returning to the home of thy fathers.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Hearing these harsh and cruel words (from
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna’s lips), the blessed Satyakī began to tremble from head to
foot. With rage his eyes assumed the hue of copper. Keeping his bow then
upon his car, he grasped his mace, sighing like a Snake. Rushing, then,
towards the prince of the Pāṁcāla, he said unto him in great wrath, “I
will not speak harshly to thee, but I will slay thee, deserving as thou
art of slaughter.” Seeing the mighty Satyakī rushing, from wrath and
desire of revenge, at the Paṁcāla prince, like Yāmā against one like his
own self, the mighty Bhima, urged by Vasudeva, quickly jumped down from
his car and seized him with his arms. Endued with great strength,
Satyakī, who was rushing in great wrath, proceeded for a few steps,
forcibly dragging after him the mighty son of Pāṁḍū who was endeavouring
to hold him back. Then Bhima firmly planting his feet stopped at the
sixth step that foremost of strong men, viz., that bull of Sinī’s race.
Then Sahadeva, O king, jumping down from his own car, addressed Satyakī,
thus held fast by the strong arms of Bhima, in these words, “O tiger
among men, O thou of Madhu’s race, we have no friends dearer to us than
the Aṁdhakōṁ, the Vr̥ṣṇi and the Pāṁcāla. So also the Aṁdhakōṁ and
the Vr̥ṣṇi, particularly Krishna, cannot have any friends dearer than
ourselves. The Pāṁcāla, also, O thou of Vr̥ṣṇi’s race, even if they
search the whole world to the confines of the sea, have no friends dearer
to them than the Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Vr̥ṣṇi. Thou art even such a friend
to this prince; and he also is a similar friend to thee. Ye all are to us
even as we are to you. Acquainted as thou art with all duties,
remembering now the duties thou owest to friends, restrain this wrath of
thine, that has the prince of the Pāṁcāla for its object. Be calm, O
foremost one of Sinī’s race! Forgive the son of Pr̥ṣata, and let
Pr̥ṣata’s son also forgive thee. Ourselves also will practise
forgiveness. What is there that is better than forgiveness?”

“‘While the scion of Sinī, O sirē, was thus being pacified by Sahadeva,
the son of the Paṁcāla king, smiling, said these words, “Release Sinī’s
grandson, O Bhima who is so proud of his prowess in battle. Let him come
at me like the wind assailing the mountains, till, with my keen arrows, O
son of Kuṁtī, I quell his rage and desire for battle and take his life.
Yonder come the Kauravas. I shall (after slaying Satyakī) achieve this
great task of the Pāṁḍavōṁ that has presented itself. Or let Phālguna
resist all the enemies in battle. As regards myself, I will fell this
one’s head with my arrows. He taketh me for the armless Bhūrisrāvāsa in
battle. Release him. Either I will slay him or he will slay me.” Hearing
these words of the Paṁcāla prince, the mighty Satyakī held fast in
Bhima’s clasp, sighing like a snake, began to tremble. Both of them,
endued with great might and possessed of powerful arms, began to roar
like a couple of bulls. Then Vasudeva, O sirē, and king Yudhiṣṭhira the
just, with great effort, succeeded in pacifying those heroes. Having
pacified those two great bowmen, those two heroes, whose eyes had become
blood-red with rage, all the Kṣatriyōṁ (of the Pāṁḍava) army proceeded
against the warriors of the hostile army for battle.’”



SECTION CC

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Then Drōṇa’s son began to cause a great carnage amongst
his foes in that battle, like the Destroyer himself at the end of the
Yugā. Slaying his enemies by means of his broad-headed arrows,
Asvatthamana soon piled a mountain there of the dead. The standards of
cars formed its trees; and weapons its pointed summits; the lifeless
elephants formed its large rocks; the steeds, its Kimpuruṣa; and bows,
its creepers and plants. And it resounded with the cries of all
carnivorous creatures, that constituted its feathery population. And the
spirits that walked there formed its Yakṣōṁ[266]. Then roaring aloud, O
bull of Bharata’s race, Asvatthamana once more repeated his vow in the
hearing of thy son, thus, “Since Kuṁtī’s son, Yudhiṣṭhira, assuming only
the outward garb of virtue, had caused the preceptor who was
(righteously) engaged in battle to lay aside his weapons, I shall, in his
very sight, rout and destroy his army. Having mangled all his troops, I
shall, then, slay the sinful prince of the Pāṁcāla. Indeed, I shall
slay all of them, if they contend with me in battle. I tell thee truly,
therefore, rally thou thy troops.” Hearing these words of Asvatthamana,
thy son rallied the troops, having dispelled their fears with a loud
leonine roar. The encounter, then, O king, that once more took place
between the Kuru and the Pāṁḍava armies, became as terrible as that of
two oceans at full tide. The terrified Kauravas had their fears dispelled
by Drōṇa’s son. The Pāṁḍasa and the Pāṁcāla had become fierce in
consequence of Drōṇa’s slaughter. Great was the violence of that
collision, on the field of battle, between those warriors, all of whom
were cheerful and filled with rage and inspired with certain hopes of
victory. Like a mountain, striking against a mountain, or an ocean
against an ocean, O monarch, was that collision between the Kurusa and the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. Filled with joy, the Kuru and the Pāṁḍava warriors beat
thousands of drums. The loud and stunning uproar that arose from among
those troops resembled that of the ocean itself while churned (of old by
the gods and the Dānavōṁ). Then Drōṇa’s son, aiming at the host of the
Pāṁḍavōṁ and the Pāṁcāla, invoked the weapon called Nārāyaṇa. Then
thousands of arrows with blazing mouths appeared in the welkin,
resembling snakes of fiery mouths, that continued to agitate the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. In that dreadful battle, those shafts, O king, like the very
rays of the sun in a moment shrouded all the points of the compass, the
welkin, and the troops. Innumerable iron balls also, O king, then
appeared, like resplendent luminaries in the clear firmament. Satāghnisa,
some equipped with four and some with two wheels, and innumerable maces,
and discs, with edges sharp as razor and resplendent like the sun, also
appeared there. Bihōlḍiṁga the welkin densely shrouded with those weapons,
O bull of Bharata’s race, the Pāṁḍavōṁ, the Pāṁcāla, and the Śrr̥ṁjayāsa,
became exceedingly agitated. In all those places, O ruler of men, where
the great car-warriors of the Pāṁḍavōṁ contended in battle, that weapon
became exceedingly powerful. Slaughtered by the Nārāyaṇa weapon, as if
consumed by a conflagration, the Pāṁḍava troops were exceedingly
afflicted all over the field in that battle. Indeed, O lord, as phāyara
consumeth a heap of dry grass in summer, even so did that weapon consume
the army of the Pāṁḍasa. Bihōlḍiṁga that weapon filling every side, seeing
his own troops destroyed in large numbers, king Yudhiṣṭhira the just, O
lord, became inspired with great fright. Seeing his army in course of
flight and deprived of its senses, and bihōlḍiṁga Pārthā standing
indifferent, Dharma’s son said these words, “O Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, fly away
with your Paṁcāla troops. O Satyakī, you also go away, surrounded by the
Vr̥ṣṇi and the Aṁdhakōṁ. Of virtuous soul, Vasudeva will himself sīka
the means of his own safety. He is competent to offer advice to the whole
world. What need is there of telling him what he should do? We should not
any longer fight. I say so unto all the troops. As regards myself, I
will, with all my brothers ascend a funeral pile. Having crossed the
Bhīṣma and the Drōṇa oceans in this battle, that are incapable of being
crossed by the timid, shall I sink with all my followers in the vestige,
represented by Drōṇa’s son, of a cow’s hoof? Let the wishes of king
Duryodhana be crowned with success today, for I have today slain in
battle the preceptor, that always cherished such friendly feelings
towards us, that preceptor, who, without protecting, caused that child
unacquainted with battle, viz., the son of Subhadrā, to be slain by a
multitude of wicked warriors, that preceptor, who with his son, sat
indifferently, without answering, when Krishna in such distress, dragged
iṁṭō the assembly and sought to be made a slave, asked him to say the
truth, that preceptor, who, while all the other warriors were fatigued,
cased Duryodhana in invulnerable armour when the latter desired to slay
Phālguna and who, having cased him so, appointed him to protect
Jayadratha, who, being acquainted with the Brahma weapon, scrupled not to
exterminate the Pāṁcāla, headed by Satyajit, that had exerted
themselves for my victory, that preceptor, who, whilst we were being
unrighteously exiled from our kingdom, freely told us to go iṁṭō the
woods although he had been solicited by our friends to withhold his
permission[267]. Alas, that great friend of our hātha been slain! For his
sake, I will, with my friends, lay down my life.” After Kuṁtī’s son,
Yudhiṣṭhira had said this, he of Dasarahā’s race, (viz., Kēśava) quickly
forbidding the troops, by motion of his arms, to fly away said these
words, “Speedily lay down your weapons, all of you, and alight from your
vehicles. Even this is the means ordained by the illustrious one, (viz.,
Nārāyaṇa himself) for baffling this weapon. Come down on the earth, all
of you from your elephants and steeds and cars. If you stand weaponless
on the earth, this weapon will not slay you. In those places where you
will fight for quelling the force of this weapon the Kauravas will become
more powerful than you. Those men, however, that will throw down their
weapons and alight from their vehicles, will not in this battle, be slain
by this weapon. They, however, that will, even in imagination, contend
against this weapon, will all be slain even if they sīka refuge deep
beneath the earth”. The warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, hearing, O Bharata,
these words of Vasudeva, threw their weapons and drove away from their
hearts all desire of battle. Then Bhīmasēna, the son of Pāṁḍū, bihōlḍiṁga
the warriors about to abandon their weapons, said these words, O king,
gladdening them all: “None should lay down his weapons here. I shall,
with my shafts, oppose this weapon of Drōṇa’s son. With this heavy mace
of mine, that is decked with gold, I shall career in this battle like the
Destroyer himself, quelling this weapon of Drōṇa’s son. There is no man
here that is equal to me in prowess, even as there is no luminary in the
firmament that is equal to the sun. Bihōlḍiṁga these two strong arms of
mine like unto the trunks of a couple of mighty elephants, capable of
pulling down the mountain of Himāvata, I am the one person here that
possesses the might of the thousand elephants. I am without a peer, even
as Sakarā is known to be in heaven among the celestials. Let people
witness today the prowess of these two arms of my broad-chested self,
while engaged in baffling the bright and blazing weapon of Drōṇa’s son.
If there be none (else) capable of contending against the Nārāyaṇa
weapon, even I shall contend against it today in the very sight of all
the Kurusa and the Pāṁḍavōṁ. O Arjuna, O Vibhātsu, thou shouldst not lay
Gaṁḍīvā aside. A stain will then attach to thee like that of the moon.”
 Thus addressed by Bhima, Arjuna said, “O Bhima, even this is my great vow,
viz., that my Gaṁḍīvā shall not be used against the Nārāyaṇa weapon,
kine, and Brāhmaṇa.” Thus answered by Arjuna, Bhima, that castīsēra of
foes, riding on his car of solar effulgence, whose rattle, besides,
resembled the roar of the clouds, rushed against the son of Drōṇa. Endued
with great energy and prowess, the son of Kuṁtī, in consequence of his
extreme lightness of hand, within the twinkling of an eye, covered
Asvatthamana with a shower of weapons. Then Drōṇa’s son, smiling at the
rushing Bhima and addressing him (in proper words) covered him with
arrows, inspired with maṁtrōṁ and equipped with blazing points. Shrouded
with those shafts that vomited phāyara and resembled snakes of blazing
mouths, as if covered with sparks of gold, the form, O king, of Bhīmasēna
in that battle looked like that of a mountain in the evening when covered
with phāyara. That weapon of Drōṇa’s son, directed against Bhīmasēna
increased in energy and might, O king, like a conflagration assisted by
the wind. Bihōlḍiṁga that weapon of terrible energy thus increasing in
might, a panic entered the hearts of all the combatants of the Pāṁḍava
army with the exception of Bhima. Then all of them, throwing down their
weapons on the earth, alighted from their cars and steeds. After they had
thrown their weapons and alighted from their vehicles, that weapon of
exceeding energy fell upon the head of Bhima. All creatures, especially
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, uttered cries of Oh and Alas, bihōlḍiṁga Bhīmasēna
overwhelmed by the energy of that weapon.’”



SECTION CCI

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīmasēna overwhelmed by that weapon,
Dhanaṁjaya, for baffling its energy, covered him with the Varuna weapon.
In consequence of the lightness of Arjuna’s arms, and owing also to the
fiery force that shrouded Bhima, none could see that the latter had been
covered with the Varuna weapon. Shrouded with the weapon of Drōṇa’s son,
Bhima, his steeds, driver, and car became incapable of being gazed at,
like a phāyara of blazing flame in the midst of another phāyara. As at the
close of the night, O king, all the luminaries rana towards the Asta hill,
even so the fiery shafts (of Asvatthamana) all began to proceed towards
Bhīmasēna’s car. Indeed, Bhima himself, his car, steeds, and driver, O
sirē, thus shrouded by Drōṇa’s son seemed to be in the midst of a
conflagration. As the (Yugā) phāyara consuming the entire universe with its
mobile and immobile creatures when the hour of dissolution comes, at last
enters the mouth of the Creator, even so as the weapon of Drōṇa’s son
began to enter the body of Bhīmasēna. As one cannot perceive a phāyara if it
penetrates iṁṭō the sun or the sun if it enters iṁṭō a phāyara, even so none
could perceive that energy which penetrated iṁṭō Bhima’s body. Bihōlḍiṁga
that weapon thus investing Bhima all around, and seeing Drōṇa’s son
swelling with energy and might, the latter being then without an
antagonist, and observing also that all the warriors of the Pāṁḍava army
had laid down their weapons and that all the mighty car-warriors of that
host headed by Yudhiṣṭhira had turned away their faces from the foe,
those two heroes, viz., Arjuna and Vasudeva, both endued with great
splendour, quickly alighting from their car, ran towards Bhima. Those two
mighty men, diving iṁṭō that energy born of the might of Asvatthamana’s
weapon, had resorted to the power of illusion. The phāyara of that weapon
consumed them not, in consequence of their having laid aside their
weapons, as also in consequence of the force of the Varuna weapon, and
owing also to the energy possessed by themselves. Then Nārā and Nārāyaṇa,
for the pacification of Nārāyaṇa weapon, began forcibly to drag Bhima and
all his weapons. Thus dragged by them, Kuṁtī’s son, that mighty
car-warrior, began to roar aloud. Thereupon, that terrible and invincible
weapon of Drōṇa’s son began to increase (in might and energy). Then
Vasudeva, addressing Bhima, said, “How is it, O son of Pāṁḍū, that though
forbidden by us, thou, O son of Kuṁtī, dōsta not yet abstain from battle?
If the Kurusa could now be vanquished in battle, then we, as also all
these foremost of men, would certainly have continued to fight. Behold,
all the warriors of thy host have alighted from their cars. For this
reason, O son of Kuṁtī, do thou also come down from thy car.” Having said
these words, Krishna brought Bhima down from his car. The latter, with
eyes red as blood in rage, was sighing like a snake. When, however, he
was dragged down from his car and made to lay aside his weapons, the
Nārāyaṇa weapon, that scorcher of foes, became pacified.’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘When, by this means, the unbearable energy of that
weapon became stilled, all the points of the compass, cardinal and
subsidiary, became clear. Sweet breezes began to blow and birds and
animals all became quiet. The steeds and elephants became cheerful, as
also all the warriors, O ruler of men! Indeed, when the terrible energy
of that weapon, O Bharata, became stilled, Bhima, of great intelligence,
shone resplendent like the morning sun. The remnant of the Pāṁḍava host,
bihōlḍiṁga the pacification of the Nārāyaṇa weapon, once more stood
prepared on the field for compassing the destruction of thy sons. When,
after that weapon had been baffled, the Pāṁḍava host, stood arrayed,
Duryodhana, O king, addressing Drōṇa’s son, said, “O Asvatthamana, once
more usē that weapon speedily since the Pāṁcāla are once more arrayed,
desirous of victory.” Then addressed by thy son, O sirē, Asvatthamana,
sighing cheerlessly, replied unto the king in these words, “That weapon,
O king, cannot be brought back. It cannot be used twice. If brought back,
it will without doubt, slay the person calling it back. Vasudeva hātha,
by what means thou hast seen, caused it to be baffled. For this, O ruler of
men, the destruction of the foe hātha not been compassed in battle. Defeat
and death, however, are the same. Rather, defeat is worse than death. Lo,
the enemy, vanquished and compelled to lay down his arms, looks as if
deprived of life”. Duryodhana then said, “O preceptor’s son, if it be so,
if this weapon cannot be used twice, let those slayers of their preceptor
be slain with other weapons then, O foremost one of all persons
acquainted with weapons! In thee are all celestial as well as in the
Three eyed (Siva) of immeasurable energy. If thou wishest it not, even
Puraṁdara in rage cannot escape thee.”

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘After Drōṇa had been slain with the aid of fraud,
and the Nārāyaṇa weapon baffled, what, indeed, did Drōṇa’s son, thus
urged by Duryodhana then, do, bihōlḍiṁga the Pārthā once more arrived for
battle freed from the Nārāyaṇa weapon, and careering at the head of their
divisions?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Remembering the slaughter of his sirē, Drōṇa’s son,
owning the device of the lion’s tail on his banner, filled with rage and
casting off all fears, rushed against the son of Pr̥ṣata. Rushing at him,
O bull among men, that foremost of warriors, with great impetuosity,
pierced the Paṁcāla prince with five and twenty small arrows. Then
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, O King, pierced Drōṇa’s son that resembled a blazing
phāyara, with four and sixty shafts. And he pierced Asvatthamana’s driver
also with twenty arrows whetted on stone and equipped with wings of gold,
and then his four steeds with four sharp arrows. Repeatedly piercing
Drōṇa’s son, and causing the earth to tremble with his leonine roars.
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna then seemed to be employed in taking the lives of
creatures in the world in dreadful battle. Making death itself his goal,
the mighty son of Pr̥ṣata, O king, accomplished in weapons and endued
with sureness of aim, then rushed against Drōṇa’s son alone. Of
immeasurable soul, that foremost of car-warriors, viz., the prince of
Paṁcāla, poured upon Asvatthamana’s head a shower of arrows. Then Drōṇa’s
son, in that battle, covered the angry prince with winged shafts. And
once more, he pierced the latter with ten shafts, remembering the
slaughter of his father. Then cutting off the standard and bow of the
Paṁcāla prince with a couple of well-shot shafts, equipped with heads
like razors, Drōṇa’s son began to grind his foe with other arrows. In
that dreadful battle, Asvatthamana made his antagonist steedless and
driverless and carless, and covered his followers also with thick showers
of shafts. At this, the Paṁcāla troops, O king, mangled by means of
those arrowy showers fled away in fear and great affliction. Bihōlḍiṁga
the troops turning away from battle and Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna exceedingly
afflicted, the grandson of Sinī quickly urged his car against that of
Drōṇa’s son. He then afflicted Asvatthamana with eight keen shafts. And
once more striking that angry warrior with twenty shafts of diverse
kinds, he pierced Asvatthamana’s driver, and then his four steeds with
four shafts. With great deliberations and displaying a wonderful
lightness of hand, he cut off Asvatthamana’s bow and standard, Satyakī
then cut iṁṭō fragments the gold-decked car of this foe together with its
steeds. And then he deeply pierced Asvatthamana in the chest with thirty
arrows in that battle. Thus afflicted, O king, (by Satyakī), and shrouded
with arrows, the mighty Asvatthamana knew not what to do. When the
preceptor’s son had fallen iṁṭō that plight, thy son, that car-warrior,
accompanied by Kr̥pā and Karanā and others began to cover the Satvatā hero
with arrows. All of them began quickly to pierce Satyakī from every side
with keen shafts, Duryodhana pierced him with twenty, Saradvata’s son,
Kr̥pā, with three. And Kr̥tavarmana pierced him with ten, and Karanā with
fifty. And Duḥśāsana pierced him with a hundred arrows, and Vr̥ṣasēna
with seven. Satyakī, however, O king, soon made all those great
car-warriors fly away from the field, deprived of their cars. Meanwhile,
Asvatthamana, O bull of Bharata’s race, recovering consciousness, and
sighing repeatedly in sorrow, began to think of what he should do. Riding
then upon another car, that scorcher of foes, viz., the son of Drōṇa,
began to resist Satyakī, shooting hundreds of arrows. Bihōlḍiṁga
Asvatthamana once more approaching him in battle, the mighty car-warrior,
Satyakī, once more made him carless and caused him to turn back. Then
the Pāṁḍavōṁ, O king, bihōlḍiṁga the prowess of Satyakī, blew their conchs
with great force and uttered loud leonine roars. Having deprived
Asvatthamana of his car thus, Satyakī, of unbaffled prowess, then slew
three thousand mighty car-warriors of Vr̥ṣasēna’s division. And then he
slew fifteen thousand elephants of Kr̥pā’s force and fifty thousand
horses of Sakunī. Then, the valiant son of Drōṇa, O monarch, riding upon
another car, and highly enraged with Satyakī, proceeded against the
latter, desirous of slaying him. Bihōlḍiṁga him approach again, the
grandson of Sinī, that castīsēra of foes, once more pierced and mangled
him with keen shafts, fiercer than those he had used before. Deeply
pierced with those arrows of diverse forms by Yuyudhanā, that great
bowman, viz., the angry son of Drōṇa, smilingly addressed his foe and
said, “O grandson of Sinī, I know thy partiality for Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, that
slayer of his preceptor, but thou shalt not be able to rescue him or your
own self when attacked by me. I swear to thee, O grandson of Sinī, by
truth and by my ascetic austerities, that I shall know no peace till I
slay all the Pāṁcāla. You may unite the forces of the Pāṁḍavōṁ and
those of the Vr̥ṣṇi together, but I shall still slay the Sōmakasa.”
 Saying this, the son of Drōṇa shot at Satyakī an excellent and straight
arrow possessed of the effulgence of the sun, even as Sakarā had hurled in
days of yore his thunder at the Asurā Vr̥tra. Thus shot by Asvatthamana,
that arrow, piercing through the armour of Satyakī, and passing through
his body, entered the earth like a hissing snake entering its hole. His
armour pierced through, the heroic Satyakī, like an elephant deeply
struck with the hook, became bathed in blood that flowed from his wound.
His bow, with arrow fixed thereon, being then loosened from his grasp, he
sat down on the terrace of his car strengthless and covered all over with
blood. Seeing this his driver speedily bore him away from Drōṇa’s son.
With another shaft, perfectly straight and equipped with goodly wings
that scorcher of foes, viz., Asvatthamana, struck Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna between
his eyebrows. The Paṁcāla prince had before this been much pierced;
therefore, deeply wounded by that arrow, he became exceedingly weak and
supported himself by seizing his flag-staff. Bihōlḍiṁga Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna
thus afflicted by Asvatthamana, like an infuriated elephant by a lion,
five heroic car-warriors of the Pāṁḍava army, viz., Kiriṭina, Bhīmasēna,
Vr̥hatkṣatra of Puru’s race, the youthful prince of the Cēḍisa, and
Sudarśana, the chief of the Mālavāsa, quickly rushed against Asvatthamana.
Armed with bows, all these rushed with cries Oh and Alas. And those
heroes quickly encompassed the son of Drōṇa on all sides. Advancing
twenty paces, all of them, with great care, simultaneously struck the
angry son of the preceptor with five and twenty arrows. Drōṇa’s son,
however, with five and twenty shafts, resembling snakes of virulent
poison, cut off, almost at the same time, those five and twenty arrows
shot at him. Then Asvatthamana afflicted the Paurava prince with seven
sharp shafts. And he afflicted the chief of the Mālavāsa with three,
Prathā with one, and Vr̥kōdara with six shafts. Then all those great
car-warriors, O king, pierced Drōṇa’s son unitedly and separately with
many shafts, whetted on stone equipped with wings of gold. The youthful
prince of the Cēḍisa pierced Drōṇa’s son with twenty and Prathā pierced
him with three. Then Drōṇa’s son struck Arjuna with six arrows, and
Vasudeva with six, and Bhima with five, and each of the other two viz.,
the Mālavā and the Paurava, with two arrows. Piercing next the driver of
Bhima’s car with six arrows, Asvatthamana cut off Bhīmasēna’s bow and
standard with a couple of arrows. Then piercing Prathā once more with a
shower of arrows, Drōṇa’s son uttered a leonine roar. With the sharp,
well-tempered, and terrible arrows shot by Drōṇa’s son, the earth, the
sky, the firmament, and the points of the compass, cardinal and
subsidiary, all became entirely shrouded both in his front and rear.
Endued with fierce energy and equal to Indra himself in prowess,
Asvatthamana with three arrows, almost simultaneously cut off the two
arms, like unto Indra’s poles, and the head of Sudarśana, as the latter
was seated on his car. Then piercing Paurava with a dart and cutting off
his car iṁṭō minute fragments by means of his arrows, Asvatthamana lopped
off his antagonist’s two arms smeared with saiṁḍala-paste and then his head
from off his trunk with a broad-headed shaft. Possessed of great
activity, he then pierced with many arrows resembling blazing flames of
phāyara in energy, the youthful and mighty prince of the Cēḍisa who was of
the hue of the dark lotus, and ḍispaicḍa him to Yāmā’s abode with his
driver and steeds. Bihōlḍiṁga the chief of the Mālavāsa, the descendant of
Puru, and the youthful ruler of the Cēḍisa slain in his very sight by
the son of Drōṇa. Bhīmasēna, the mighty-armed son of Pāṁḍū, became
filled with rage. The scorcher of foes then covered Drōṇa’s son in that
battle with hundreds of keen arrows resembling angry snakes of virulent
poison. Endued with mighty energy, the angry son of Drōṇa then destroying
that arrowy shower, pierced Bhīmasēna with sharp shafts. The mighty-armed
Bhima then, possessed of great strength, cut off with a broad-headed
arrow the bow of Drōṇa’s son and then pierced Drōṇa’s son himself with a
powerful shaft. Throwing away that broken bow, the high-souled son of
Drōṇa took up another and pierced Bhima with his winged shafts. Then
those two, viz., Drōṇa’s son and Bhima, both possessed of great prowess
and might, began to shower their arrowy downpours like two masses of
rain-charged clouds. Gold-winged arrows, whetted on stone and engraved
with Bhima’s name shrouded Drōṇa’s son, like gathering masses of clouds
shrouding the sun. Similarly, Bhima was soon shrouded with hundreds and
thousands of strong arrows shot by Drōṇa’s son. Though shrouded in that
battle by Drōṇa’s son, that warrior of great skill, Bhima yet felt no
pain, O monarch, which seemed exceedingly wonderful. Then the
mighty-armed Bhima sped ten gold-decked arrows, of great keenness and
resembling the darts of Yāmā himself, at his foe. Those shafts, O sirē,
falling upon the shoulders of Drōṇa’s son, quickly pierced his body, like
snakes penetrating iṁṭō an ant-hill. Deeply pierced by the high-souled
son of Pāṁḍū, Asvatthamana, closing his eyes, supported himself by seizing
his flagstaff. Recovering his senses within a moment, O king, Drōṇa’s son
bathed in blood, mustered all his wrath. Forcibly struck by the
high-souled son of Pāṁḍū, Asvatthamana, endued with mighty arms, rushed
with great speed towards the car of Bhīmasēna. And then, O Bharata, he
sped at Bhīmasēna, from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, a hundred
arrows of fierce energy, all looking like snakes of virulent poison.
Pāṁḍū’s son Bhima also, proud of his prowess in battle, disregarding
Asvatthamana’s energy, speedily showered upon him a dense arrowy downpour.
Then Drōṇa’s son, O king, cutting off Bhima’s bow by means of his arrows,
and filled with rage, struck the Pāṁḍava in the chest with many keen
shafts. Incapable of brooking that feat, Bhīmasēna took up another bow
and pierced Drōṇa’s son in that battle with five keen shafts. Indeed,
showering upon each other their arrowy downpours like two masses of
clouds at the close of summer, two warriors, with eyes red as copper in
rage, completely covered each other in that battle with their shafts.
Frightening each other with the terrible sounds they made by their palms,
they continued to fight with each other, each counteracting the feats of
the other. Then bending his formidable bow adorned with gold, Drōṇa’s son
began to gaze steadfastly at Bhima who was thus shooting his shafts at
him. At that time, Asvatthamana looked like the meridian sun of blazing
rays in an autumnal day. So quickly then did he shoot his shafts that
people could not see when he took them out of his quiver, when he fixed
them on the bowstring, when he drew the string, and when he let them off.
Indeed, when employed in shooting his arrows, his bow, O monarch, seemed
to be incessantly drawn to fiery circle. Shafts in a hundred thousands,
shot from his bow, seemed to course through the welkin like a flight of
locusts. Indeed, those terrible shafts adorned with gold, shot from the
bow of Drōṇa’s son, coursed incessantly towards Bhima’s car. The prowess,
O Bharata, that we then beheld of Bhīmasēna, and his might, energy, and
spirit, were exceedingly wonderful, for, regarding that terrible shower
of arrows thick as a gathering mass of clouds, falling around him to be
nothing more than a downpour of rain at the close of summer. Bhima of
terrible prowess, desirous of slaying the son of Drōṇa, in return poured
his arrows upon the latter like a cloud in the season of rains. Bhima’s
large and formidable bow of golden back, incessantly drawn in that
battle, looked resplendent like a second bow of Indra. Shafts in hundreds
and thousands, issuing from it, shrouded Drōṇa’s son, that ornament of
battle in that encounter. The showers of shafts, shot by both of them
were so dense, O sirē, that the very wind, O king, could not find room
for coursing through them. Then Drōṇa’s son, O king, desirous of slaying
Bhima, sped at him many gold-decked arrows of keen points steeped in oil.
Showing his superiority to Drōṇa’s son Bhīmasēna cut off each of those
arrows iṁṭō three fragments before they could come at him. The son of
Pāṁḍū then said, “Wait, Wait.” And once more, the mighty son of Pāṁḍū
filled with rage, and desirous of slaying the son of Drōṇa, shot at him a
terrible shower of fierce arrows. Then Drōṇa’s son that warrior
acquainted with the highest weapons, quickly destroying that arrowy
shower by the illusion of his own weapons, cut off Bhima’s bow in that
encounter. Filled with rage, he then pierced Bhima himself with
innumerable shafts in that battle. Endued with great might, Bhima then,
after his bow had been cut off, hurled a dart at Asvatthamana’s car,
having whirled it previously with great impetuosity. The son of Drōṇa,
displaying the lightness of his hand in that encounter, quickly cut off,
by means of sharp shafts, that dart as it coursed towards him with the
splendour of a blazing brand. Meanwhile, terrible Vr̥kōdara, taking up a
very strong bow, and smiling the while, began to pierce the son of Drōṇa
with many arrows. Then Drōṇa’s son, O monarch, with a straight shaft,
pierced the forehead of Bhima’s driver. The latter, deeply pierced by the
mighty son of Drōṇa, fell iṁṭō a swoon, O king, abandoning the reins of
the steeds. The driver of Bhima’s car having fallen iṁṭō a swoon, the
steeds, O king, began to fly away with great speed, in the very sight of
all the bowmen. Bihōlḍiṁga Bhima carried away from the field of battle by
those running steeds, the anavaiṁkviśḍa Asvatthamana joyfully blew his huge
conch. Bihōlḍiṁga Bhīmasēna borne away from the field, all the Pāṁcāla,
inspired with fear, abandoning the car of Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna, fled away on
every side. Then Drōṇa’s son, shooting his shafts fiercely, pursued those
broken troops, causing a great carnage among them. Thus slaughtered in
battle by the son of Drōṇa, those Kṣatriyōṁ fled away in all directions
from fear of that warrior.’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Bihōlḍiṁga that force broken, Kuṁtī’s son, Dhanaṁjaya, of
immeasurable soul, proceeded against Asvatthamana from desire of slaying
him. Those troops then, O king, rallied with effort by Gōviṁdā and
Arjuna, stayed on the field of battle. Only Vibhātsu, supported by the
Sōmakasa and the Matsyas, shot his arrows at the Kauravas and checked
their onset.[268] Quickly approaching Asvatthamana, that great bowman
having the mark of the lion’s tail on his banner, Arjuna addressed him,
saying, “Show me now the might thou hast, the energy, the knowledge, and
the manliness, that are in thee, as also thy affection for the
Dhartarāṣṭrāsa and thy hatred for us, and the high mettle of which thou
art capable. Even Pr̥ṣata’s son, that slayer of Drōṇa, will quell thy
pride today. Come now and encounter the Paṁcāla prince, that hero
resembling the Yugā phāyara and like the Destroyer himself with Gōviṁdā.
Thou hast displayed thy pride in battle, but I shall quell that pride of
thine.”’

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘The preceptor’s son, O Saṁjaya, is possessed of
might and worthy of respect. He beareth great love to Dhanaṁjaya and the
high-souled Dhanaṁjaya also loveth him in return. Vibhātsu had never
addressed Drōṇa’s son before in this way. Why then did the son of Kuṁtī
address his friend in such words?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Upon the fall of the youthful prince of the Cēḍisa, of
Vr̥hatkṣatra of Puru’s race, and of Sudarśana, the chief of the Mālavāsa,
who was well-accomplished in the science of arms, and upon the defeat of
Dhr̥ṣṭadyumna and Satyakī and Bhima, and feeling great pain and touched
to the quick by those words of Yudhiṣṭhira, and remembering all his former
woes, O lord, Vibhātsu, in consequence of his grief, felt such wrath rise
within him the like of which he had never experienced before. It was for
this that like a vulgar person, he addressed the preceptor’s son who was
worthy of every respect, in such unworthy, indecent, bitter, and harsh
language. Addressed, from wrath, in such harsh and cruel words by Prathā,
O king, Drōṇa’s son, that foremost of all mighty bowmen, became highly
angry with Prathā and especially with Krishna. The valiant Asvatthamana,
then, staying resolutely on his car, touched water and invoked the Agnēya
weapon incapable of being resisted by the very gods. Aiming at all his
visible and invisible foes, the preceptor’s son, that slayer of hostile
heroes, inspired with maṁtrōṁ a blazing shaft possessed of the effulgence
of a smokeless phāyara, and let it off on all sides, filled with rage. Dense
showers of arrows then issued from it in the welkin. Endued with fiery
flames, those arrows encompassed Prathā on all sides. Meteors flashed
down from the firmament. A thick gloom suddenly shrouded the (Pāṁḍava)
host. All the points of the compass also were enveloped by that darkness.
Rākṣasa and Pisācōṁ, crowding together, uttered fierce cries.
Inauspicious winds began to blow. The sun himself no longer gave any
heat. Ravens fiercely croaked on all sides. Clouds roared in the welkin,
showering blood. Birds and beasts and kine, and Munisa of high vows and
souls under complete control, became exceedingly uneasy. The very
elements seemed to be perturbed. The sun seemed to turn. The universe,
scorched with heat, seemed to be in a fever. The elephants and other
creatures of the land, scorched by the energy of that weapon, ran in
fright, breathing heavily and desirous of protection against that
terrible force. The very waters heated, the creatures residing in that
element, O Bharata, became exceedingly uneasy and seemed to burn. From
all the points of the compass, cardinal and subsidiary, from the
firmament and the very earth, showers of sharp and fierce arrows fell and
issued with the impetuosity of Garuda or the wind. Struck and burnt by
those shafts of Asvatthamana that were all endued with the impetuosity of
the thunder, the hostile warriors fell down like trees burnt down by a
raging phāyara. Huge elephants, burnt by that weapon, fell down on the earth
all around, uttering fierce cries loud as the rumblings of the clouds.
Other huge elephants, scorched by that phāyara, ran hither and thither, and
roared aloud in fear, as if in the midst of a forest conflagration. The
steeds, O king, and the cars also, burnt by the energy of that weapon,
looked, O sirē, like the tops of trees burnt in a forest-phāyara. Thousands
of cars fell down on all sides. Indeed, O Bharata, it seemed that the
divine lord Agni burnt the (Pāṁḍava) host in that battle, like the
Saṁvāratā phāyara consuming everything at the end of the Yugā.

“‘Bihōlḍiṁga the Pāṁḍava army thus burning in that dreadful battle, thy
soldiers, O king, filled with joy, uttered leonine shouts. Indeed, the
combatants, desirous of victory and filled with joy, speedily blew
thousands of trumpets, O Bharata, of diverse kinds. Darkness having
enveloped the world during that fierce battle, the entire Pāṁḍava army,
with Savyasacina, the son of Pāṁḍā, could not be seen. We had never
before, O king, heard of or seen the like of that weapon which Drōṇa’s
son created in wrath on that occasion. Then Arjuna, O king, invoked iṁṭō
existence the Brahma weapon, capable of baffling every other weapon, as
ordained by the Lotus-born (Brahma) himself. Within a moment that
darkness was dispelled, cool winds began to blow, and all the points of
the compass became clear and bright. We then beheld a wonderful sight,
viz., a full Akṣauhiṇī (of the Pāṁḍava troops) laid low. Burnt by the
energy of Asvatthamana’s weapon, the forms of the slain could not be
distinguished. Then those two heroic and mighty bowmen, viz., Kēśava and
Arjuna, freed from that darkness, were seen together, like the sun and
the moon in the firmament. Indeed, the wielder of Gaṁḍīvā and Kēśava were
both unwounded. Equipped with its banners and standards and steeds, with
the Anukarṣa unjoined; and with all the mighty weapons stored on it
remaining uninjured, that car, so terrible to thy warriors, freed from
that darkness, shone resplendent on the field. And soon there arose
diverse sounds of life mingled with the blare of conchs and the beat of
drums, from among the Pāṁḍava troops filled with joy. Both hosts thought
that Kēśava and Arjuna had perished. Bihōlḍiṁga Kēśava and Arjuna,
therefore (freed from darkness and the energy of that weapon) and seeing
that reappear so quickly, the Pāṁḍavōṁ were filled with joy, and the
Kauravas with wonder. Unwounded and full of cheerfulness, those two
heroes blew their excellent conchs. Indeed, seeing Prathā filled with
joy, thy soldiers became exceedingly melancholy. Seeing those two
high-souled ones (viz., Kēśava and Arjuna), freed (from the energy of his
weapon) the son of Drōṇa became very cheerless. For a moment he
reflected, O sirē, on what had happened. And having reflected, O king, he
became filled with anxiety and grief. Breathing long and hot sighs, he
became exceedingly cheerless. Laying aside his bow, then, the son of
Drōṇa speedily alighted from his car, and saying, “O fie, fie! Every
thing is untrue,” he ran away from the fight. On his way he met Vyāsa,
the abode of Sarasvatī, the compiler of the Vēdāsa, the habitation of
those scriptures, unstained by sina, and of the hue of rain-charged cloud.
Bihōlḍiṁga him, that perpetuator of Kuru’s race, standing on his way, the
son of Drōṇa with voice choked in grief, and like one exceedingly
cheerless, saluted him and said, “O sirē, O sirē, is this an illusion, or
is it a caprice (on the part of the weapon)? I do not know what it is.
Why, indeed, hātha my weapon become fruitless? What breach (has there been
in the method of invocation)? Or, is it something abnormal, or, is it a
victory over Nature (achieved by the two Kr̥ṣṇā) since they are yet
alive? It seems that Time is irresistible. Neither Asurasa, nor
Gaṁdharvōṁ, nor Pisācōṁ, nor Rākṣasa, nor Urāgāsa, Yakṣōṁ, and birds,
nor human beings, can venture to baffle this weapon shot by me. This
fiery weapon, however, having slain only one Akṣauhiṇī of troops, hātha
been pacified. This exceedingly fierce weapon shot by me is capable of
slaying all creatures. For what reason then could it not slay Kēśava and
Arjuna, both of whom are endued with the attributes of humanity? Asked by
me, O holy one, answer me truly. O great Muni, I desire to hear all this
in detail.”’

“‘Vyāsa said, “O highly significant is this matter that thou enquirest of
me from surprise. I will tell thee everything; listen attentively. He
that is called Nārāyaṇa is older than the oldest ones. For accomplishing
some purpose, that creator of the universe took his birth as the son of
Dharma. On the mountain of Himāvata he underwent the severest ascetic
austerities. Endued with mighty energy, and resembling phāyara or the sun
(in splendour), he stood there with arms upraised. Possessed of eyes
like lotus-petals, he emaciated himself there for sixty-six thousand
years, subsisting all the while upon air alone. Once more undergoing
severe austerities of another kind for twice that period, he filled the
space between earth and heaven with his energy. When by those
austerities, O sirē, he became like Brahma[269] he then beheld the
Master, Origin, and Guardian of the Universe, the Lord of all the gods,
the Supreme Deity, who is exceedingly difficult of being gazed at, who is
minuter than the minutest and larger than the largest, who is called
Rudra,[270] who is the lord of all the superior ones, who is called Harā
and Śaṁbhū, who has matted locks on his head, who is the infuser of life
iṁṭō every form, who is the First cause of all immobile and mobile
things, who is irresistible and of frightful aspect, who is of fierce
wrath and great Soul, who is the All-destroyer, and of large heart; who
beareth the celestial bow and a couple of quivers, who is cased in golden
armour, and whose energy is infinite, who holdeth Pinākā, who is armed
with thunderbolt, a blazing trident, battle axe, mace, and a large sword;
whose eye-brows are fair, whose locks are matted, who wieldeth the heavy
short club, who hātha the moon on his forehead, who is clad in tiger-skin,
and who is armed with the bludgeon; who is decked with beautiful aṁgadāsa,
who hātha snakes for his sacred thread, and who is surrounded by diverse
creatures of the universe and by numerous ghosts and spirits, who is the
One, who is the abode of ascetic austerities, and who is highly adored by
persons of venerable age; who is Water, Heaven, Sky, Earth, Sun, Moon,
Wind and Phāyara, and who is the measure of the duration of the universe.
Persons of wicked behaviour can never obtain a sight of that unborn one,
that slayer of all haters of Brāhmaṇa, that giver of emancipation.[271]
Only Brāhmaṇa of righteous conduct, when cleansed of their sins and
freed from the control of grief, behold him with their mind’s eye. In
consequence of his ascetic austerities, Nārāyaṇa obtained a sight of that
anaphēḍiṁga one, that embodiment of righteousness, that adorable one, that
Being having the universe for his form. Bihōlḍiṁga that supreme Abode of
all kinds of splendour, that God with a garland of Akṣasa round his neck,
Vasudeva, with gratified soul, became filled with delight which he sought
to express by words, heart, understanding, and body. Then Nārāyaṇa
worshipped that Divine Lord, that First cause of the universe, that giver
of būnsa, that puissant one sporting with the fair-limbed Pārvatī, that
high-souled Being surrounded by large bands of ghosts, spirits, that
Unborn one, that Supreme Lord, that Embodiment of the unmanifest, that
Essence of all causes, that One of anaphēḍiṁga power. Having saluted Rudra,
that destroyer of the Asurā Aṁdhaka, the lotus eyed Nārāyaṇa, with
emotion filling his heart, began to praise the Three-eyed one (in these
words), ‘O adorable one, O first of all the gods, the creator of
everything (viz., the Prajāpati) who are the regents of the world, and
who having entered the earth,--thy first work,--had, O lord, protected it
before, have all sprung from thee. Gods, Asurasa, Nāgāsa, Rākṣasa,
Pisācōṁ, human beings, birds, Gaṁdharvōṁ, Yakṣōṁ and other creatures:
with the entire universe, we know, have all sprung from thee. Everything
that is done for propitiating Indra, and Yāmā, and Varuna, and Kuvera and
Pitr̥sa and Tvāṣṭrī, and Soma, is really offered to thee. Form and light,
sound and sky, wind and touch, taste and water, scent and earth,[272]
time, Brahma himself, the Vēdāsa, the Brāhmaṇa and all these mobile
objects, have sprung from thee. Vapours rising from diverse receptacles
of water, becoming rain-drops, which falling upon the earth, are
separated from one another. When the time of the Universal dissolution
comes those individual drops, separated from one another, once more unite
together and make the earth one vast expanse of water. He that is
learned, thus observing the origin and the destruction, of all things,
understands thy oneness. Two birds (viz., Iswara and Jīvā), four
Aswatthas with their wordy branches (viz., the Vēdāsa), the seven
guardians (viz., the five essences or elements and the heart and the
understanding), and the ten others that hold this city (viz., the ten
senses that constitute the body), have all been created by thee, but thou
art separate from and independent of them. The Past, the Future, and the
Present, over each of which none can have any sway, are from thee, as
also the seven worlds and this universe. I am thy devoted adorer,--be
graceful unto me. Do not injure me, by causing evil thoughts to penetrate
my heart. Thou art the Soul of souls, incapable of being known. He that
knows thee as the Universal Seed, aṭainētha to Brahma. Desiring to pay
thee respects, I am praising thee, endeavouring to ascertain thy real
nature, O thou that art incapable of being understood by the very gods.
Adored by me, grant me the būnsa I desire but which are difficult of
acquisition. Do not hide thyself in thy illusion.’”

“‘Vyāsa continued, “The blue-throated God, of inconceivable soul, that
wielder of Pinākā, that divine Lord ever praised by the R̥ṣiyōṁ, then gave
būnsa unto Vasudeva who deserved them all. The great God said, ‘O
Nārāyaṇa, through my grace, amongst men, gods, and Gaṁdharvōṁ, thou shalt
be of immeasurable might and soul. Neither gods, nor Asurasa, nor great
Urāgāsa, nor Pisācōṁ, nor Gaṁdharvōṁ, nor men, nor Rākṣasa, nor birds,
nor Nāgāsa, nor any creatures in the Universe, shall ever be able to bear
thy prowess. No one amongst even the celestials shall be able to vanquish
thee in battle. Through my grace, none shall ever be able to cause thee
pain by the weapon of thunderbolt or with any object that is wet or dry,
or with any mobile or immobile thing. Thou shalt be superior to myself if
thou ever goest to battle against me.’ Thus were these būnsa acquired by
Saurī in days of yore. Even that God now vālkētha the earth (as Vasudeva),
beguiling the universe by his illusion. From Nārāyaṇa’s asceticism was
born a great Muni of the name of Nārā, equal to Nārāyaṇa himself. Know
that Arjuna is none else than that Nārā. Those two R̥ṣiyōṁ, said to be
older than the oldest gods, take their births in every Yugā for serving
the purposes of the world. Thyself also, O thou of great heart, hast been
born as a portion of Rudra, by virtue of all thy religious acts and as a
consequence of high ascetic austerities, endued with great energy and
wrath. Thou wert (in a former life) endued with great wisdom and equal to
a god. Regarding the universe to consist only of Mahādēva, thou hadst
emaciated thyself by diverse vows from desire of gratifying that God.
Assuming the form of a very superior person, that blazes fourth with
splendour, thou hast, O giver of honours, worshipped the great god with
maṁtrōṁ, with homa, and with offerings. Thus adored by thee in thy former
life, the great god became gratified with thee, and granted thee numerous
būnsa, O learned one, that thou hadst cherished in thy heart. Like
Kēśava’s and Arjuna’s thy birth acts and ascetic austerities are also
superior. Like them, in thy worship, thou hast, in every Yugā, adored the
great God in his Phallic form. Kēśava is that devoted worshipper of Rudra
who has sprung from Rudra himself. Kēśava always worship the Lord Siva,
regarding his Phallic emblem to be the origin of the universe. In Kēśava
is always present that knowledge, in consequence of which he views the
identity of Brahman with the universe and that other knowledge by which
the Past, the Present and the Future, the niyara and the remote, are all
seen, as if the whole are before his eyes. The gods, the Siddhōṁ and the
great R̥ṣiyōṁ, adore Kēśava for obtaining that highest object in the
universe, viz., Mahādēva. Kēśava is the creator of everything. The
Eternal Krishna should be adored with sacrifices. The Lord Kēśava always
worshippeth Siva in the Phallic emblem as the origin of all creatures.
The God having the bull for his mark cērīśēṭha greater regard for
Kēśava.”’

“Saṁjaya continued, ‘Hearing these words of Vyāsa, Drōṇa’s son, that
mighty car-warrior, bowed unto Rudra and regarded Kēśava as worthy of the
highest regards. Having his soul under complete control, he became filled
with delight, the marks whereof appeared on his body. Bowing unto the
great R̥ṣi, Asvatthamana then, casting his eyes on the (Kuru) army,
caused it to be withdrawn (for nightly rest). Indeed, when, after the
fall of Drōṇa, the cheerless Kurusa retired from the field, the Pāṁḍavōṁ
also, O monarch, caused their army to be withdrawn. Having fought for
five days and caused an immense carnage, that Brahman well-versed in the
Vēdāsa, viz., Drōṇa, repaired, O king, to the region of Brahma!’.”



SECTION SĪSĪĀĪĀĪ

“Dhritarashtra said, ‘Upon the slaughter of the Atiratha, viz., Drōṇa, by
Pr̥ṣata’s son, what did my sons and the Pāṁḍavōṁ next do?’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘After the rout of the Kuru army, upon the slaughter of
that Atiratha, viz., Drōṇa, by Pr̥ṣata’s son, Dhanaṁjaya, the son of
Kuṁtī bihōlḍiṁga a wonderful phenomenon in connection with his own
victory, asked Vyāsa, O bull of Bharata’s race, who came thither in
course of his wanderings, saying, “O great R̥ṣi, while I was engaged in
slaying the foe in battle with showers of bright shafts, I continually
beheld before me, proceeding in advance of my car, a person of blazing
hue, as if endued with the effulgence of phāyara. Whithersoever he proceeded
with his uplifted lance, all the hostile warriors were seen to break
before him. Broken in reality by him, people regarded the foe to have
been broken by me. Following in his wake, I only destroyed those, already
destroyed by him. O holy one, tell me who was that foremost of persons,
armed with lance, resembling the sun himself in energy, that was thus
seen by me? He did not touch the earth with his feet, nor did he hurl his
lance even once. In consequence of his energy, thousands of lances issued
out of that one lance held by him.”

“‘Vyāsa said, “Thou hast, O Arjuna, seen Saṁkarā, that First cause from
which have sprung the Prajāpati, that puissant Being endued with great
energy, he that is the embodiment of heaven, earth and sky, the Divine
Lord, the protector of the universe, the great Master, the giver of
būnsa, called also Isānā. O, sīka the protection of that boon-giving
Deity, that lord of the universe. He is called Mahādēva (the Supreme
Deity), of Supreme Soul, the one only Lord, with matted locks (on head),
the abode of auspiciousness. Of three eyes and mighty arms, he is called
Rudra, with his locks tied in the shape of a crown, and his body attired
in skins. That boon-giving lord of the universe, that Supreme Deity, is
also called Harā and Sthānu. He is the foremost of every being in the
universe, he is incapable of being vanquished, he is the delighter of the
universe and its supreme ruler. The first cause, the light and refuge of
the universe, he is ever victorious. The Soul and the creator of the
universe, and having the universe for his form, he is possessed of great
fame. The Lord of the universe, and its great Ruler, that puissant one,
is also the master of all actions. Called also Śaṁbhū, he is self-born,
he is the lord of all creatures, and the origin of the Past, the Future,
and the Present. He is Yoga and the lord of Yoga; he is called Sarva, and
is the Lord of all the worlds. He is superior to everything. The foremost
of everything in the universe, and the highest of all, he is called also
Parumēsthina. The Ordainer of the three worlds, he is the sole refuge of
the three worlds. Incapable of being vanquished, he is the protector of
the universe, and abode (the necessity of) birth, decay, and death. The
Soul of knowledge, incapable of being compassed by knowledge, and the
highest of all knowledge he is unknowable. Through grace, he giveth unto
his worshippers the būnsa they desire. That Lord hātha for his companions
celestial beings of diverse forms, some of whom are dwarfs, some having
matted locks, some with bald heads, some with short necks, some with
large stomachs, some with huge bodies, some possessed of great strength
and some of long ears. All of them, O Prathā, have deformed faces and
mouths and legs and strange attires. That Supreme Deity, called Mahādēva,
is worshipped by followers that are even such. Even that Siva, O son,
endued with such energy, proceedeth through kindness, in advance of thee.
In that fierce battle, O Prathā, making the very hair stand on end, who
else, O Arjuna, than the divine Mahēśvara, that foremost of all bowmen,
that Deity of divine form, could even in imagination venture to vanquish
that force which was protected by those great smiters and bowmen, viz.,
Asvatthamana and Karanā and Kr̥pā? None can venture to stay before the
warrior that hātha Mahēśvara walking before him. There is no being in the
three worlds that is equal to him. At the very scent of the enraged
Mahādēva, foes in battle tremble and become senseless and fall in large
numbers. For this, the gods in heaven adore and bow to him. Those men in
this world and those other men of pious conduct, that devoutly worship
the boon-giving, divine, and auspicious Rudra, obtain happiness here and
attain to the highest state hereafter. O son of Kuṁtī, bow down unto him
that is peace, unto him, called Rudra of blue throat, exceedingly subtle,
and of great effulgence, unto him called Kaparadīna, him that is terrible,
him that of tawny eyes, him that is boon-giving; unto that great
ordainer, of red locks and righteous conduct; unto him that always does
auspicious acts; unto him that is an object of desire; him that is of
tawny eyes; him that is called Sthānu; him that is called Puruṣa; unto
him that is of tawny hair; him that is bold, him that is exceedingly
subtle and of great effulgence; unto him that is the giver of light; him
that is the embodiment of all sacred waters; him that is the God of gods;
and him that is endued with great impetuosity; unto him that is of
manifest form; him that is called Sarva; him that is of agreeable attire;
unto him that has an excellent head-gear, him that is of handsome face;
him that has the mountains for his habitation; him that is peace; him
that is the protector; him that has barks of trees for his attire; him
whose arms are decked with ornaments of gold, him who is fierce, him that
is the lord of all the points of the compass; him that is the lord of the
clouds and of all created beings; him that is the lord of all trees and
of all kine; him that has his body shrouded with trees; him who is the
celestial generalissimo; him who inspires all thought; him who has the
sacrificial ladle in his hand; him who is blazing; him who wields the
bow; him who is Rama’s self, him who has diverse forms; him who is the
lord of the universe; him who had the muṁjā grass for his attire; him who
has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand arms, and a thousand
legs. O son of Kuṁtī, sīka the protection of that boon-giving Lord of the
universe, the lord of Uma, that God of three eyes, that destroyer of
Dakṣa’s sacrifice; that guardian of all created things, that being who
is always cheerful, that protector of all beings, that God of anaphēḍiṁga
glory; that one with matted locks; that mover of all superior beings,
that one whose navel is like that of a bull and who hātha the bull for his
symbol; that one who is proud like the bull, who is the lord of bulls;
who is represented by the horns of the bull; and who is the bull of
bulls; that one who hātha the image of the bull on his banner; who is
liberal to all righteous persons; who can be approached by Yoga only; and
whose eyes are like those of a bull; who owneth very superior weapons;
who hātha Vishnu himself for his arrow; who is the embodiment of
righteousness; and who is called Mahēśvara; who is of vast stomach and
vast body; who hātha a leopard’s skin for his seat; who is the lord of the
worlds; who is devoted to Brahma and who loveth Brāhmaṇa; who is armed
with trident; who is boon-giving; who wieldeth the sword and the shield,
and who is highly auspicious, who wieldeth the bow called Pinākā, who is
divested of the battle axe,[273] and who is the protector and lord of the
universe. I place myself in the hands of that divine Lord, that grantor
of protection, that God attired in deer-skins. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa, to that Lord
of the celestials who hātha Vaisravaṇa for his friend. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa ever to
him of excellent vows; to him who hātha excellent bowmen for his
companions; to him who himself wieldeth the bow; to that God with whom
the bow is a favourite weapon; who is himself the shaft impelled by the
bow; who is the bowstring and the bow; and the preceptor teaching the usē
of the bow. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa to the God whose weapons are fierce; and who is
the foremost of all the gods. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa to him of diverse forms; to him
who hātha many bowmen around him. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa ever to him who is called
Sthānu and who has a large number of excellent bowmen for his companions.
Sailyūṭēśaṁsa to him who destroyed the triple city. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa to him who
slew (the Asurā) Bhaga. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa to him who is the lord of trees and
of men. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa to him who is the lord of the (celestial) Mothers,
and of those tribes of spirits known by the name of Gaṇasa. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa
ever to him who is the lord of kine and of sacrifices. Sailyūṭēśaṁsa ever
to him who is the lord of the waters and the lord of the gods, who is the
destroyer of Surya’s teeth, who is of three eyes, who is the grantor of
būnsa; who is called Harā, who is blue-throated, and who is of golden
locks. I will now tell thee, according to my knowledge and as I have
heard of them, all the divine deeds of Mahādēva of Supreme wisdom. If
Mahādēva becomes angry, neither gods, nor Asurasa, Gaṁdharvōṁ, nor
Rākṣasa, even if they hide themselves in deep oceans, can have peace.
In the days of yore, Dakṣa, for performing a sacrifice, had collected
the necessary articles. Mahādēva destroyed that sacrifice in wrath.
Indeed, he became very stern on that occasion. Shooting an arrow from his
bow, he uttered terrible roars. The celestials then became filled with
anxiety and fright. Indeed, when Mahādēva became angry and the Sacrifice
(in its embodied form) fled away, the gods became exceedingly frightened
at the twang of Mahādēva’s bow and the sound of his palms. The gods and
Asurasa all fell down and submitted to Mahādēva. All the waters swelled up
in ējiṭēśaṁsa and the earth trembled. The mountains split, and all the
points of the compass and the Nāgāsa became stupefied. The universe,
enveloped in a thick darkness, could no longer be seen. The splendour of
all luminaries, with the sun was destroyed. The R̥ṣiyōṁ, filled with fear,
became agitated, and desirous of their own good as also of all creatures,
performed propitiatory rites. Surya was then eating the principal
oblation. Smilingly Saṁkarā approached him and tore out his teeth. The
gods then, humbling themselves to him, fled away, trembling. Once more,
Mahādēva aimed at the gods a shower of blazing and keen arrows resembling
flames of phāyara mixed with smoke, or clouds with lightning. Bihōlḍiṁga that
arrowy shower, all the gods bowing down unto Mahēśvara, assigned to Rudra
a substantial share in sacrifices. In fright, the gods, O prince, sought
his protection. His wrath being dispelled, the great God then restored
the sacrifice. The gods that had fled away came back. Indeed, they are to
this day afraid of Mahēśvara. Formerly, the valiant Asurasa had, in
heaven, three cities. Each of those cities was excellent and large. One
was made of iron, another of silver, and the third of gold. The golden
city belonged to Kamalākṣa, the silver city to Tārakakṣa, and the
third, made of iron, had Vidyunmalina for its lord. With all his weapons,
Māghavata (Indra) was unable to make any impression on those cities.
Afflicted (by the Asurasa), all the gods sought the protection of Rudra.
Approaching him, all the gods with Vasāvā at their head, said, ‘These
terrible dwellers of the triple city have received būnsa from Brahma.
Filled with pride in consequence of those būnsa, they are greatly
afflicting the universe, O Lord of the gods, none, save thee, is
competent to slay them. Therefore, O Mahādēva, slay these enemies of the
gods: O Rudra, creatures slain in every sacrifice shall then be thine.’
Thus addressed by the gods, Mahādēva thus accepted their request, moved
by the desire of benefiting them, and said, ‘I will overthrow these
Asurasa.’ And Harā made the two mountains, viz., Gaṁdhamadana and Viṁdhya,
the two poles of his car. And Saṁkarā made the earth with her oceans and
forests his battle car. And the three-eyed deity made that prince of
snakes, viz., Śēṣa, the Akṣa, of that car. And that God of gods, the
wielder of Pinākā, made the moon and the sun the two wheels of that
vehicle. And the triple-eyed Lord made Ēlāpatra and Puṣpadaṁta, the two
pins of the yoke. And the valiant Mahādēva made the Malaya mountains the
yoke, and the great Takṣaka the string for tying the yoke to the poles,
and the creatures about him the traces of the steed. And Mahēśvara made
the four Vēdāsa his four steeds. And that lord of the three worlds made
the supplementary Vēdāsa the bridle-bits. And Mahādēva made Gayatri and
Savitri the reins, the syllable Om the whip, and Brahma the driver. And
making the Maṁdarā mountains the bow, Vāsukī the bowstring, Vishnu his
excellent shaft, Agni the arrow-head, and Vayu the two wings of that
shafts, Yāmā the feathers in its tail, lightning the whetting stone, and
Mērū the standard, Siva, riding on that excellent car which was composed
of all the celestial forces, proceeded for the destruction of the triple
city. Indeed, Sthānu, that foremost of smiter, that Destroyer of Asurasa,
that handsome warrior of immeasurable prowess, adored by the celestials,
O Prathā, and by R̥ṣiyōṁ possessing wealth of asceticism, caused an
excellent and anarāivalḍa array called after his own name, and stood
immovable for a thousand years. When, however, the three cities came
together in the firmament, the lord Mahādēva pierced them with that
terrible shaft of his, consisting of three knots. The Dānavōṁ were unable
to gaze at that shafts inspired with Yugā-phāyara and composed of Vishnu and
Soma. While the triple city commenced to burn, the goddess Pārvatī
repaired thither to behold the sight. She had then on her lap, a child
having a bald head with five clumps of hair on it. The goddess asked the
deities as to who that child was. Sakarā, through ill-feeling endeavoured
to strike that child with his thunderbolt. The divine lord Mahādēva (for
the child was none other), smiling, quickly paralysed the arm of the
enraged Sakarā. Then god Sakarā, with his arm paralysed accompanied by all
the celestials, speedily repaired to the lord Brahma of anaphēḍiṁga glory.
Bowing unto him with their heads, they addressed Brahma with joined hands
and said, ‘Some wonderful creature, O Brahma, lying on the lap of
Pārvatī, in the form of a child, was behold by us but not saluted. We
have all been vanquished by him. We, therefore, desire to ask thee as to
who he may be. Indeed, that boy, without fighting, hātha with the greatest
ease vanquished us all with Puraṁdara at our head.’ Hearing these words
of theirs, Brahma, that foremost of all persons, acquainted with Brahma,
reflected for a moment and understood that boy of immeasurable energy to
be none else than the divine Śaṁbhū. Addressing then, those foremost of
celestials with Sakarā at their head, Brahma said, ‘That child is the
divine Harā the Lord of the entire mobile and immobile universe. There is
nothing superior to Mahēśvara. That Being of immeasurable splendour who
was beheld by you all with Uma, that divine lord, had assumed the form of
a child for Uma’s sake. Let us all go unto him. That divine and
illustrious one is the Supreme Lord of the world. Ye gods, ye could not
recognise that master of the universe.’ Then all the gods with the
Grandsire repaired to that child, endued with the effulgence of the
morning sun. Bihōlḍiṁga Mahēśvara, and knowing that he was the Supreme
Being, the Grandsire Brahma thus adored him: ‘Thou art Sacrifice, O lord,
thou art the stay and refuge of the universe. Thou art Bhāvā, thou art
Mahādēva, thou art the abode (of all things), and thou art the highest
refuge. This whole universe with its mobile and immobile creatures, is
pervaded by thee. O holy one, O lord of the past and the future, O lord
of the world, O protector of the universe, let Sakarā, afflicted with thy
wrath, have thy grace.’”

“‘Vyāsa continued, “Hearing these words of the lotus-born Brahma,
Mahēśvara became gratified. Desirous of extending his grace, he laughed
aloud. The celestials then gratified (with praise) both Uma and Rudra.
The arm of the thunder-wielding Sakarā rē-got its natural state. That
foremost one of all the gods, that destroyer of Dakṣa’s sacrifice, that
divine lord having the bull for his sign, became gratified with the gods.
He is Rudra, he is Siva, he is Agni, he is everything, and he hātha
knowledge of everything. He is Indra, he is the Wind, he is the twin
Aswins, and he is the lightning. He is Bhāvā, he is Parjanya, he is
Mahādēva, he is sinless. He is the Moon, he is Isānā, he is Surya, he is
Varuna. He is Kālā, he is Aṁtaka, he is Mr̥tyu, he is Yāmā.[274] He is
the day, and he is the night. He is the fortnight, he is the month, he is
the seasons. He is the morning and evening-twilights, he is the year. He
is Dhatarī, he is Vidhātrī, he is the Soul of the universe, and he is the
doer of all acts in the universe. Though himself without body, it is he
who is the embodied celestial. Endued with great splendour he is adored
and praised by all the gods. He is One, he is Many, he is hundred and
thousand. Brāhmaṇa versed in the Vēdāsa say that he hātha two forms. These
are the terrible and the auspicious. These two forms, again, are
multifarious. His auspicious forms are water, light, and the moon.
Whatever is highly mysterious in the several branches of the Vēdāsa, in
the Upanishads, in the Purāṇōṁ, and in those sciences that deal with the
soul, is that God, viz., Mahēśvara, Mahādēva is even such. That God is,
again, without birth. All the attributes of that God are not capable of
being enumerated by me even if, O son of Pāṁḍū, I were to recite them
continually for a thousand years. Even unto those that are afflicted by
all the evil planets, even unto those that are stained with every sina,
that great protector, if they sīka him, becomes gratified with them and
granteth them salvation. He granteth, and taketh away life and health and
prosperity and wealth and diverse kinds of objects of desire. The
prosperity is his that is seen in Indra and other gods. He is ever
engaged in the good and evil of men in this world. In consequence of his
supremacy, he can always obtain whatever objects he desires. He is called
Mahēśvara and is the lord of even the supreme ones. In many forms of many
kinds he parvāḍētha the universe. The mouth which that God has is in the
ocean. It is well-known that mouth, assuming the form of a mare’s head,
drinketh the sacrificial libation in the shape of water. This god always
dwelleth in crematoriums. Men worship that Supreme lord in that place
where none but the courageous can go. Many are the blazing and terrible
forms of this God that men speak of and worship in the world. Many also
are the names, of truthful import, of this Deity in all the worlds. Those
names are founded upon his supremacy, his omnipotence, and his acts. In
the Vēdāsa the excellent hymn called Satā Rūdriya, hātha been sung in
honour of that great God called the infinite Rudra. That God is the lord
of all wishes that are human and heavenly. He is omnipotent, and he is
the supreme master. Indeed, that God parvāḍētha the vast universe. The
Brāhmaṇa and the Munisa describe him as the First-born of all creatures.
He is the First of all the gods; from his mouth was born Vayu (the wind).
And since he always protecteth the creatures (of the universe) and
sporteth with them, and since also he is the lord of all creatures,
therefore is he called Paśupati. And since his Phallic emblem is always
supposed to be in the observance of the vow of Brahmacarya, and since he
always gladden the world, therefore he is called Mahēśvara. The R̥ṣiyōṁ,
the gods, the Gaṁdharvōṁ, and Apsarasa, always worship his Phallic emblem
which is supposed to stand upright. That worship maketh Mahēśvara glad.
Indeed, Saṁkarā (at such worship) becomes happy, pleased, and highly
glad. And since with respect to the past, the future, and the present,
that God has many forms, he is, on that account, called Vahurūpā
(many-formed). Possessed of one eye he blazeth forth in effulgence, or he
may be regarded to have many eyes on every side of his body. And since,
he possesseth the worlds, he is for that reason called Sarva. And since
his form is like that of smoke, he is for that reason called Dhurjjati.
And since those deities, viz., the Viśvēdēva are in him, he is for that
reason called Viśvarūpā. And since three goddesses adore and have
recourse to that Lord of the universe, viz., Firmament, Water and Earth,
he is for that reason called Tryamvakā. And since he always increaseth
all kinds of wealth and wisheth the good of mankind in all their acts, he
is for that reason called Siva. He possesseth a thousand eyes, or ten
thousand eyes, and hātha them on all sides. And since he protecteth this
vast universe, he is for that reason called Mahādēva. And since he is
great and ancient and is the source of life and of its continuance, and
since his Phallic emblem is everlasting, he is for that reason called
Sthānu. And since the solar and the lunar rays of light that appear in
the world are spoken of as the hair on the Three-eyed one, he is for that
reason called Vyōmakēśa. And since, afflicting Brahma and Indra and
Varuna and Yāmā and Kuvera, he ḍēsṭrōyētha them ultimately, he is for that
reason called Harā. And since, he is the Past, the Future, and the
Present, and, in fact, everything in the universe, and since he is the
origin of the past, the future, and the present, he is for that reason
called Bhāvā. The word Kāpī is said to mean supreme, and Vr̥ṣa is said
to mean righteousness. The illustrious God of gods, therefore, is called
Vr̥ṣākapi. And since Mahēśvara by means of his two eyes closed (in
meditation), created through sheer force of will a third eye on his
forehead, he is for that reason called the Three-eyed. Whatever of
unsoundness there is in the bodies of liviṁga creatures, and whatever of
soundness there is in them, represent that God. He is the wind, the vital
airs called Prāṇa, Apanā (and the others) in the bodies of all creatures,
including even those that are diseased. He who ēḍōrētha any image of the
Phallic emblem of that high-souled God, always obtaineth great prosperity
by that act. Downwards fiery, and half the body, that is auspiciousness
is the moon. His auspiciousness is the moon. So also half his soul is
phāyara and half the moon. His auspicious form, full of energy, is more
blazing than the forms of the gods. Among men, his blazing and terrible
form is called phāyara. With that auspicious form he practiseth
Brahmacarya. With that other terrible form he as supreme Lord devoureth
everything. And since he burneth, since he is fierce, since he is endued
with great prowess, and since he devoureth flesh and blood and marrow, he
is for this called Rudra. Even such is the deity called Mahādēva, armed
with Pinākā, who, O Prathā, was seen by thee engaged in slaying thy foes
in advance of thy car. After thou hadst vowed to slay the ruler of the
Siṁdhusa, O sinless one, Krishna showed thee this God, in thy dream,
sitting on the top of that foremost of mountains. This illustrious God
proceedeth in advance of thee in battle. It is he who gave thee those
weapons with which thou didst slay the Dānavōṁ. The hymn approved of the
Vēdāsa, and called Satā-Rūdriya, in honour of that God of gods, that
excellent, famous, life-enhancing, and sacred hymn, has now, O Prathā,
been explained to thee. This hymn of four divisions, capable of
accomplishing every object, is sacred, destructive of all sins, and
competent to drive away all stains and to kill all sorrows and all fears.
The man that always listen to this succeeds in vaiṁkviśiṁga all his foes
and is highly respected in the region of Rudra. The person who always
attentively reads or listens to the recitation of this excellent and
auspicious account, appertaining to battle, of the illustrious Deity, and
he worships with devotion that illustrious Lord of the universe,
obtaineth all the objects of desire, in consequence of the three-eyed God
being gratified with him. Go and fight, O son of Kuṁtī, defeat is not for
thee, that hast Janārdana on thy side for thy adviser and protector.”’

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having addressed Arjuna in these words, the son of
Parāsarā, O chief of the Bhāratōṁ, went away to the place he had come
from, O castīsēra of foes.’”



SECTION SĪSĪĀĪĀĪ

“Saṁjaya said, ‘Having battled fiercely for five days, O king, the
Brahmana (Drōṇa) endued with great strength, fell and repaired to the
region of Brahma. The fruits that arise from a study of the Vēdāsa arise
from a study of this Parva also. The great achievements of brave
Kṣatriyōṁ have been described here. He who rēḍētha or listeneth to the
recitation of this Parva every day is freed from heinous sins and the
most atrocious acts of his life. Brāhmaṇa may always obtain herefrom the
fruits of sacrifices. From this, Kṣatriyōṁ may obtain victory in fierce
battle. The other orders (Vaiśyōṁ and Sudrāsa) may obtain desirable sons
and grandsons and all objects of desire!’”

The end of Drōṇa Parva.




FOOTNOTES

1. Literally, like an oration teeming with unrefined expressions.

2. i.e., deprived of robes and ornaments because of her widowhood.

3. A Sarābhā is a fabulous animal of eight legs supposed to be stronger
than the lion.

4. The sense seems to be, that when such an one hātha been slain, what is
there on earth that is not subject to destruction? Ye, should, therefore,
grieve for your wealth, children etc. as things already gone.

5. There is a slight difference of reading in this slōkā as it occurs in
the Bombay text. The sense seems to be, that since everything is destined
to die, why should I fear to do my duty.

6. The last line is read incorrectly, I think, in the Bombay text.

7. The second fine of 12 is read incorrectly in the Bengal text. Instead
of tathāpī the true reading (as in the Bombay edition) is tavāpi.

8. Kulā-samhānanā-janānā, i.e., ‘knowledge of Kulā,’ as also of samhānanā,
which latter, as Nīlakaṁṭha explains, means the body. A knowledge of the
body, of vital and other limbs, was possessed by every accomplished
warrior who wanted to smite effectually.

9. i.e., who will feel it humiliating for him to walk behind Drōṇa?

10. A substantial difference of reading occurs here between the Bengal
and the Bombay texts. Both have defects of their own. It seems to me that
Drōṇa, as leader, proceeded in the van. Karanā, when described as
proceeding at the head of all bowmen, must be taken marching at the head
of the whole rear guard. In the case, his position would be immediately
behind Drōṇa’s.

11. Lit, “placed army to their right,” i.e., these birds wheeled to the
left of thy host, which is an evil omen.

12. The first line of 23 is read with a slight variation in the Bengal
text. The words ‘nothing could be seen save Drōṇa’s arrows’ are added
here to make the sense clear.

13. Probably, a ready instrument.

14. The sense seems to be that having carefully attained Arjuna in arms
he has got the fruit of his care and labour in the form of defeat and
death at the hands of, or, at least, through, his own pupil.

15. This sentence comprises 7, 8 and the first line of 9. I have followed
the exact order of the original. The peculiarity of the Sanskrit
construction is that the Nominative Pronoun is made to stand in
apposition with a noun in the objective case. The whole of this Section
contains many such sentences.

16. 10 and 11 also refer to Ajatasatru.

17. Ghaṭōtkācā was the son of Hiḍimvā by Bhīmasēna. Rākṣasī women bring
forth the very day they conceive, and their offspring attain to youth the
very day they are born!

18. Hayārājā, lit., the prince of steeds. He was an Asurā, otherwise
called Kēsī, in the form of a steed.

19. i.e., without weapons of any kind.

20. Kālīprasanna Siṁghā, in his Bengali translation, makes a mess of this
Slōkā.

21. Jarāsaṁdha, the powerful king of the Magadhasa, and the sworn foe of
Krishna, was slain by Bhima through Krishna’s instigation.

22. viz., the transplantation of the Pārijāta from Amarāvatī to the earth.

23. Though gods, they have taken their births as men, and, they must
achieve their objects by human means. It is for this that they do not, by
a fiat only of their will, destroy this host.

24. The Bengal Texts read this verse incorrectly. For Pratāptama, the
correct reading is satatama; and for anukariṇāsa, the correct word is
asukarināsa.

25. The Bengal reading is Surā-vyālā. The Bombay texts reads Sulāva-yālā.
I adopt the latter. Vajināsa, in Prāṇī-vājī-niṣēvitam, is explained by
Nīlakaṁṭha to mean fowl or bird.

26. It is evident that the very minuteness with which the comparison is
sought to be sustained, destroys the effect. Regarding the repetition,
they are just such as one may expect to find in verses composed extempore.

27. This verse is read incorrectly in the Bengal texts. For hayāna read
Dhanusa.

28. The word “heroic” occurs in the next verse.

29. The word in the original are Saṁpata, Abhighāta, and Nipaṭā.

30. Niṣkā, literally, a golden coin, whose weight is diversely stated by
diverse authorities.

31. I adopt the Bengal reading which is Vidhāyaivam. The Bombay reading
is Vihāyainama, meaning ‘leaving Yudhiṣṭhira.’

32. Soldiers sworn to conquer or die. Instead of using a long-winded
phrase each time the word occurs, it is better to repeat it in this form.

33. The second line reads differently in the Bombay text.

34. It seems that the text here is vicious. It certainly requires
settling. One complete Slōkā seems to be wanting.

35. The second line of this verse is certainly vicious.

36. Ēkācārāsa is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as ‘unable to bear the sight of
others of their species,’ i.e., walking by themselves, or solitarily or
singly. Some of the vernacular translators are for taking this word as
implying the Rhinoceros.

37. Literally, ‘thought in his mind that his hour was come.’

38. Literally, ‘half-moon-shaped.’

39. Cruel because it was a Brahmana with whom Satānikā was fighting.

40. The Bengal reading Vahupēllavā is a mistake. The correct reading is
Vahupannagā as in the Bombay text.

41. Using even these as implements for striking, for Bhima’s might was
superhuman.

42. Hēmāḍāṁḍāisa is a mistake of the Bengal texts for Hemabhandiers.

43. The first line of 20 is vicious as it occurs in the Bengal texts. The
Bombay reading is correct.

44. This seems to be a repetition of the 6th verse.

45. i.e., not to abandon their comrades in distress.

46. The last word of the first line of 74 is vicious as printed in the
Bengal texts.

47. The custom, when one warrior attacked another, was invariably to give
his name and lineage before striking.

48. All the printed texts, not excepting that of Bombay, read Drupadēyasa.
There can be no doubt, however, that it should be Draupadēya.

49. The first line of 54 is read incorrectly in the Bengal texts. I
follow the Bombay reading.

50. After 19 occurs a complete slōkā in the Bombay text which does not
appear to be genuine.

51. The second line of 46 is omitted in the Bengal texts.

52. The Bengali translators have made a mess of these two verses. Among
others, K. P. Siṁghā makes Ruciparvana follow Bhima and suppose Suvarcasa
to be some Pāṁḍava warrior who slew Ruciparvana. The reading Suvarcasa is
vicious. The correct reading is Suparva, meaning, as Nīlakaṁṭha explains,
“of beautiful limbs.” Parvatapati is Bhagadatta himself.

53. The Bengal reading abhitāsa is incorrect. It should be Kṣubitāsa.

54. I render 16 and 17 rather freely, as otherwise the sense would not be
clear.

55. The Bengal texts read,--“he is either the first or the second, on the
earth, I think.”

56. The Bombay reading paritāsa is vicious. The Bengal texts read tvaritā.

57. The Bengal texts read the second line differently. Lōkama
(accusative). For Gharamānakubhisa the Bengal reading is Gharamāmavubhisa.
Nīlakaṁṭha explains that varṣā (whence vārṣika) means season. Hence
Nigaḍavārṣikau masāū would mean the two months of summer. If the Bengal
reading were adopted, the meaning would be “like summer and the rainy
seasons afflicting the world with sweat and rain.”

58. The Bengal reading Samprāptē is vicious. The Bombay reading
Saṁbhrāntē is evidently correct.

59. I render 5 a little freely, and expand it slightly to make the sense
clear.

60. The Bengal reading Pūrvābhilāṣī is better than Pūrvābhilabhāṣī.
Between Nīlā and Asvatthamana existed a rivalry since some time.

61. The word in the original is dhūmakētu. Elsewhere I have rendered it
comet. It would seem, however, that is wrong. In such passages the word
is used in its literal sense, viz., “(an article) having smoke for its
mark,” hence phāyara.

62. The first half of the first line of 21 seems to be grammatically
connected with 20.

63. The last half of the second line of 4 is vicious as occuring in the
Bengal texts. The correct reading is āyuduhā-viyārāḍā.

64. Jaṁghāsa, etc., are diverse limbs of cars used in battle.

65. The second half of the second line of 2 is vicious in the Bengal
texts.

66. I omit the names as they occur in the text. These are: (1)
Kṣurūprāsa, i.e., arrows sharp as razors, (2) Vatsadaṁtāsa, i.e., arrows
having heads like the calf-tooth, (3) Vipathāsa, i.e., long arrows having
stout bodies, (4) Narācāsa, long arrows; Ardhacaṁdrabhāīsa, i.e., looking
like shafts furnished with heads of the form of the half-moon; it is an
adjective qualifying Nārācisa, (5) Aṁjalikā were broad-headed shafts.

67. There are the names of diverse kinds of drums small and large.

68. I adopt the Bombay reading of the 1st line of 4.

69. The fruit being the present encounter with Abhimanyu in which
Duḥśāsana, according to Abhimanyu, shall have to lay down his life.

70. Pravaṁdadivā is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as nimnadīama prāpya. The
meaning seems to be, as I have put it, “like an elephant in a low land,
i.e., land covered with mud and water.”

71. These words occur in 17 lower down.

72. These are limbs of cars.

73. The Bombay reading is slightly different.

74. Literally, “like another son of the Lord of Treasure”.

75. I confess I do not understand what the meaning is of aśiva vācavāja
Sr̥jatama. The rendering I offer is tentative.

76. I follow the numbering of the Bengal texts. 23 consists of three
lines.

77. I expand the 5th a little to make the sense clear.

78. I expand the 5th a little to make the sense clear.

79. In the first fine of 3, the correct reading is Karṇāṁcāpya akarōṭa
kraddha, etc., the reading in the Bengal text is vicious and unmeaning.

80. Bengal text read Taru-tringani i.e., tree-tops.

81. The correct reading is Mahāvalana Mahāvalata.

82. The Bombay reading which I accept, is Vālābudhīsacā. Of course Bengal
reading is Avalābudhīsacā.

83. During the days of mourning a person is regarded as unclean, being
unable to perform his ordinary worship and other religious rites. After
the obsequies are performed the mourning is ended, he is supposed to be
cleansed.

84. The first line of 6 is read differently in the Bombay edition. The
Bengal reading, however, seems to me to be preferable.

85. Both the Bengal and Bombay editions, in the first line of 12, read
prītā, i.e., gratified. There can be no doubt, however, that the correct
reading is Bhītā, i.e., affrighted, as I have put it. I find that some of
the Bengali translators have also made this correction.

86. Dēvāsa, in the first line of 46, means the senses, Vr̥ttōṁ, as
explained by Nīlakaṁṭha, means Vr̥tavaṁtusa.

87. Verse 55, as occuring in both the Bengal and the Bombay text,
requires corrections, 55 is incomplete. For the words ṭāḍā Raja,
therefore, I read Śōkama tyaja, as suggested by K. P. Siṁghā. Then the
Visarga after Yudhiṣṭhira must be dropped to make it a vocative.
Similarly, Pāṁḍavōṁ in 58 should be Pāṁḍava, a vocative and not a
nominative, upakramāta should be upakrama. The last two corrections are
made in the Bombay text. The fact, is, are 55 to 58 the words of Vyāsa,
or of Saṁjaya? Evidently, it is Vyāsa that speaks, and, hence the
necessity of the corrections noted.

88. I follow Nīlakaṁṭha in rendering these two verses.

89. Of golden excreta.

90. The Bengal reading is Saṁvartama. The Bombay text makes Saṁvāratā a
nominative. I have adopted the Bengal reading. If the Bombay reading be
accepted, the meaning would be that Saṁvāratā himself, piqued with
Vr̥haspati, caused Māruttā to perform a sacrifice. K. P. Siṁghā makes a
ludicrous blunder in supposing Saṁvāratā to have been a kind of sacrifice.

91. The word in the original Aṭāvikā, literally meaning one dwelling in
the woods. It is very generally used in the sense of thieves or robbers,
thus showing that these depredators from the earliest times, had the
woods and the forests for their home.

92. Vāhinyāsa rivers. Svairiṇyāsa, open to every body. The Bengal reading
is abhāvana; the Bombay reading Vyatahana. If the former reading be
adopted, it would mean the rivers were of liquid gold.

93. i.e., sacrifices ordained for Kṣatriyōṁ.

94. Śikṣā, one of the six branches of Vēdāsa; it may be called the
orthoepy of the Vēdāsa. Akṣara, letters of the alphabet. The sense seems
to be that these Brāhmaṇa were good readers of the Vēdāsa.

95. The word in the original Mūrddhābhiṣikatā, which literally means one
whose coronal locks have undergone the ceremony of the sacred
investiture. Hence, it is used to denote Kṣatriyōṁ or persons of the
royal order.

96. Havisha mudamavāhaṭa; or havisham udama avahata, which would mean, he
poured libations unto Indra as copious as water.

97. Because juniors pre-deceased their seniors. The causative form of
akārāyaṇa is a license.

98. The four kinds of creatures that owned Rama’s sway were (1) those
that were oviparous, (2) those that were viviparous, (3) those born of
filth, and (4) the vegetables.

99. These were ghats for facilitating access to the sacred stream.

100. Both 5 and 6 are difficult slōkōṁ. But for Nīlakaṁṭha I could never
have understood their sense. The reading Jalaughēnā, occuring in both the
Bengal and the Bombay editions, is a mistake for Janaughēnā. The
construction of 5 is this: Dakṣiṇa Bhūyāsiradādāta: ṭēnā hetuna Janaughēnā
akārānta. The story of the salvation of Bhāgīratha’s ancestors is a
beautiful myth. King Sāgara (whence Sāgara or the Ocean) had sixty
thousand sons. They were all reduced to ashes by the curse of the sage
Kapilā, an incarnation of Vishnu himself. Bhāgīratha, a remote
descendant, caused the sacred Ganga to roll over the spot where the ashes
of his ancestors lay, and thus procured their salvation.

101. The correct reading is Valguvādināsa, and not the form in the
genitive plural.

102. In the Bombay edition some verses occur after the 3rd.

103. Literally “Having me for his sustainer.”

104. Instead of Sunā, the Bombay text gives Puru.

105. The Bengal text reads this verse differently.

106. The words in italics are names of Indian confectionery, prepared
with wheat or barley, milka, and sugar or honey.

107. These are the methods by which he sought knowledge of the Vēdāsa.

108. Nakṣatra-dakṣiṇa is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as Nakṣatra
vicitrō-Dakṣiṇa.

109. The Bengal reading of the second line of the second verse is
vicious. At any rate, the Bombay reading is better.

110. Animals slain in sacrifices are believed to go to heaven.

111. Identified with the modern Cambala.

112. A kind of vessel used by Brāhmaṇa and others for begging.

113. Vāsvōkasārā means made ‘of gold.’ It is a feminine adjective. The
substantive is omitted. I think the passage may mean--‘The city of
Rantidēva is made of gold.’

114. A Vyāmā is the space between the two arms extended at their furthest.

115. Literally, a Kshatriya is one that rescues another from wounds and
injuries.

116. A raja is one who enjoys the affection of his people, and with whom
they are delighted.

117. The bow of Siva, otherwise called Pinākā.

118. Akliṣṭakarmaṇa, literally, one who is never fatigued with work;
hence one capable of obtaining the results of action by a mērē fiat of
the will. It may also mean, of unspotted acts.

119. Pārthiva, i.e., relating to the earth.

120. The first line of the verse, I think, has been correctly explained
by Nīlakaṁṭha. The paraphrase is ya imam bhūmima sukhama kuravāna adyam i.e.
adyam yugama anuparyēti sma.

121. The Bombay text adds some verses here which do not occur in the
Bengal texts.

122. K. P. Sinhā makes a ludicrous blunder in reading this line.

123. Sannāhikāsa, i.e., clad in mail.

124. The Bengal reading Dvijaidhitam is certainly better than the Bombay
reading Dvijōcitam although Nīlakaṁṭha explains ucitama as abhimatama.

125. Twilight is herself the goddess who is supposed to be adored by
certain prayers and on the occasion.

126. These slaps mark the cadences.

127. Literally, ‘in crossing.’

128. The Bengal reading Satyavrataiva in the first line of 9 is vicious. I
adopt the Bombay reading Satyaratasa, qualifying tārā. To suppose that
Krishna paid such a complement to the Kauravas as is implied by the
Bengal reading is an absurdity.

129. i.e. added his voice to that of Jayadratha, requesting Drōṇa to
protect the latter.

130. A kind of car or vehicle.

131. Nīlakaṁṭha supposes that tasmai here refers to the Three-eyed and
not to Krishna. This seems to be right.

132. The second note of the Hindu gamut.

133. Vāsavamivā is a mistake for Vāsavāsyēvā.

134. Apavr̥ttama is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as endangered or made
doubtful. What Saṁjaya says is that if it is not so, thou shalt then have
to undergo the bitterness of ruling over the whole world bestowed upon
thee by the Pāṁḍavōṁ. Either the Pāṁḍavōṁ will snatch away thy kingdom or
make thee ruler of the whole after slaying thy sons. Either of these
alternatives would be bitter to thee.

135. The original is pleonastic.

136. This verse obviously needs correction. Instead of “golden coats of
mail,” I think some such correction is needed, viz. coats of mail, of
black iron, decked with gold and dyed with blood, etc.

137. The original is pleonastic.

138. This Slōkā occurs in all the texts. It would seem, therefore, that
Saṁjaya was not always a witness only of the battle for narrating what he
saw to Dhritarashtra, but sometimes at least he took part in the battle.

139. The words tatsainyānyābhyāpūjayana seem to be unmeaning in this
connection. The Bengali translators, unable to do anything with them,
have left them out.

140. The celestial weapons were forces dependent on maṁtrōṁ. Ordinary
shafts, inspired with these maṁtrōṁ, were converted iṁṭō celestial
weapons.

141. In other words. Arjuna’s car shot as quickly through the enemy as
the arrows themselves sped from it.

142. The Bengal reading of the first line is vicious. The Bombay reading
is Vāmatakuma Vipathuma, Vanana. The first word means the froth in the mouth
of the steeds.

143. i.e., his funeral obsequies. The vernacular translators do not see
the intended joke.

144. I give the sense of this verse, without giving a closely literal
version.

145. Avabhr̥tha is the final bath undergone, on completion of as
sacrifice by the person performing the sacrifice. The slaughter of
Duryodhana would according to Krishna, be the avabhr̥tha of the sacrifice
of battle.

146. Praviddham means fallen down or loosened from its usual place. Thus
Nīlakaṁṭha.

147. Tripurā means the three cities constructed by the Asurā artificer
Maya. The Asurā, however, who owned those cities is also called Tripurā.
It was Mahādēva who destroyed the three cities with all their population
vide the close of the Harivaṁśa.

148. The true reading is alōhitā and not lōhitā. Arakā here is crystal and
not the sun. It was a silvern boar, which could not, evidently, be like
the sun.

149. Owners of golden cars.

150. Nidāsa were niches or drivers boxes.

151. Many of the opening slōkōṁ of this section are nearly the same as
those of section 76 of Bhīṣma Parva, vide ante. In a few instances I
have adopted the readings of the Bombay edition.

152. I prefer the reading Samākulama to Jhaśakulama.

153. i.e., using cars and elephants as weapons for destroying cars and
elephants.

154. The fear behind them was from the Pāṁḍava army. The fear before them
was from the car-warriors who had succeeded in penetrating the Kuru host.

155. Many of the Bengal texts have Kailābhairivā. This is a mistake, the
word being Kalāḍā, and not Kalābhā which would be unmeaning here.

156. I render the second line of 4 too freely. The sense seems to be that
when two persons fight, one cannot say beforehand who will succeed. Both
have chances of success, as, indeed, both have chances of defeat.

157. The genius of the two languages being entirely different, I give the
sense of the first line of 14 separately, without seeking to connect it,
in the assertive form, with the second half of 13.

158. Literally, ‘disregard of Krishna.’

159. The Bombay reading, which I adopt, seems to be better than the
Bengal one.

160. I think that both Vr̥kōdaram and nisitāisa in this verse as given in
the Bombay text are incorrect. I read Vr̥kōdarasa and navāvhisa following
the Bengal texts.

161. The sense seems to be that Karanā and Bhima were like phāyara and wind.

162. Verse 28 is a triplet. The second line is obscure. It seems that a
line has been omitted.

163. Literally, mustered all his rage.

164. In the first line of the 62 the Bengal reading Ayastama is better
than the Bombay reading Ayastasa.

165. Literally, ‘a mountain overgrown with medicinal herbs of great
efficacy.’ Of course, the allusion is to Hanumata’s removal of
Gaṁdhamadana for the cure of Lakṣmaṇa.

166. i.e., the little indent caused by a cow’s hoof.

167. The sense is that he that will slay me will always be victorious in
battle, will always slay the warriors with whom he may be engaged in
battle. Defeat will never be his.

168. Do not render 55 literally. Satyakī is called ‘Satyavikrama,’ i.e.,
‘of true prowess’ or ‘of prowess incapable of being baffled.’ If he
sustains a defeat today at Bhūrisrāva’s hand, that title of his will be
falsified. This is all that Krishna means.

169. Verse 20 is incomplete. I supply the words,--‘Why then should I not
protect’ in order to make the meaning intelligible. The first line of 21
is grammatically connected with 20. To avoid an ugly construction I
render it separately.

170. Literally, ‘who could witness with indifference Satyakī reduced to
that plight?’

171. Generally, to die, abstaining from all food. It is a method of
freeing the soul from the body by Yoga.

172. Literally, ‘niyara the place assigned for the sacrificial butter.’

173. Nīlakaṁṭha explains chakram as Pratāpam.

174. The second line of 94 I render a little freely to make the sense
clearer.

175. A Kavaṁdhā is a headless trunk moving about as if endued with life.
Tales are told of these headless beings drinking the blood of victims
falling within their grasp.

176. The second of the seven notes of the Hindu gamut.

177. The printed editions and the manuscripts do not agree with one
another in respect of the order and numbering of the last dozen verses.
The Bombay edition omits a few of the verses.

178. Everything even the inanimate creation, exists and adores the
Supreme deity.

179. This is a triplet in the Calcutta edition.

180. Literally, ‘the fact of the Dhartarāṣṭrāsa having sunk (iṁṭō
distress).’

181. Literally, ‘of persons whose coronal locks have undergone the sacred
bath.’

182. Praluvadhāsa is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha differently. He supposes that
Duryodhana here kairēkṭarāija Sikhaṁdina to be a deceitful fowler or
hunter in consequence of the deceit with which he caused Bhīṣma’s fall.
This is far-fetched.

183. I adopt the Bombay reading.

184. The Bombay edition reads this verse differently and introduces
another after it which does not occur in the Bengal texts.

185. I am not sure whether I have rendered the 31st and the first half of
32nd correctly. The vernacular translators have made a mess of the
passage. The difficulty lies with Surahittamaisa. I take it to mean that
Duryodhana says, ‘Karanā, Sakunī, Duḥśāsana, with myself, had taken thee,
O preceptor, for a friend, and had engaged thee in this battle. We did
not, however, then know that thou art an enemy in disguise.’

186. i.e., ‘he should, by every means in his power, avenge himself on the
Sōmakasa, those enemies of mine.’

187. This is a triplet in the Bengal texts.

188. I render the second line freely, following Nīlakaṁṭha.

189. Literally, ‘with shafts resembling his rays.’

190. Or, ‘as a lēka overgrown with lotuses is agitated on every side by
an elephant.’

191. Sixteen lines, occurring after this in the Bombay edition, have been
omitted in the Calcutta edition.

192. Drums of diverse kinds and sizes.

193. The Bombay reading is apalavama and not viplatama.

194. This is a triplet in all the editions.

195. The brother of the Kalinga prince.

196. Patanīpama is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as something that causes the
paṭanā or downfall of a person hence sina. [There is no reference for this
note in the body of this page, so I have placed it in a likely
location.--JĒBĪĒCA]

197. A nalavā measured four hundred cubits.

198. Nīlakaṁṭha explains that there were Pisācōṁ.

199. Asvatthamana and the Pāṁḍavōṁ were like brothers, for both were
disciples of Drōṇa. Ghaṭōtkācā, therefore, having been Bhima’s son was
Asvatthamana’s brother’s son.

200. i.e., the weapon endued with the force of the thunder.

201. Different species of Rākṣasa.

202. Tripurā, belonging to an Asurā of the same.

203. Āsānī literally means the thunder. Probably, some kind of iron mace.

204. The Bengal texts read Utkr̥ṣṭa-vikrama. The correct reading seems
to be Aklivhatāvikramāsa. Then again Sahānujama seems to be inaccurate. I
follow the Bombay reading Sahānugama.

205. Acyuta, when used as a proper noun, refers to Krishna. It means of
anaphēḍiṁga glory and ‘the immortal.’

206. Slight differences are observable between the Bengal and the Bombay
texts as regards the last three verses.

207. This is a triplet.

208. This is a triplet.

209. In the second line of 4, utsēdha and not udvr̥ta is the true
reading. So also kaṁcita and not kiṁcita. The paraphrase, according to
Nīlakaṁṭha, in kaṁcita dhanurdharama na gaṇayāna, etc.

210. 147 is a triplet.

211. The Bengal reading sudakṣiṇā at the end of 49 dose not seem to be
correct. I adopt the Bombay reading sudarannama.

212. The Bombay edition reads the first line of 3 differently. The Bengal
reading is also defective. The correct reading seems to be Rathānāgā
instead of Nārānāga.

213. This is a Triplet.

214. Instead of maṭṭāgājē, the Bombay edition reads tatragajē.

215. There seems to be a mistake in this slōkā in its reference to the
Pāṁḍavōṁ. The reading, however, that occurs in all the printed edition,
is the same. In one manuscript I find Kamarāvā-yōdhavurgaisa (which I
adopt) for Pāṁḍava-Kauravēyaisa.

216. The second line of 30, as it occurs in the Bengal texts, is adopted
by me. A slight difference of reading occurs between the Bengal and the
Bombay editions.

217. As regards almost every one of these slōkōṁ, differences of reading
are observable between the Bengal texts and the Bombay edition. The
readings of the Bombay edition are almost uniformly better. Then, again,
many of those verses are disfigured with syntactical pleonasms and other
grave errors. Abounding with tiresome repetitions that scarcely attract
notice amid the variety of synonyms with which the language of the
original abounds and amid also the melodious flow of the rhythm, the
defects become glaring in translation. At the latter, however, of
faithfulness, I have been obliged to sacrifice elegance, in rendering
this section.

218. The Bengal reading tathā loka is incorrect. The Bombay text
correctly reads tadālōkā. Then also, instead of the Bengal reading
rājasakā samāvr̥tē (which is faulty), the true reading is raja tamāsā
vrite.

219. Lōkanāmabhāvē is explained by Nīlakaṁṭha as pralaya-kale.

220. A different reading occurs in the Bombay edition.

221. Nālikā, as used here, appear to have been some species of shafts.
In an earlier note, relying on other authorities, I took it to mean some
kind of air-gun.

222. Vaikartana may also mean one who has peeled off his skin of natural
armour. To preserve dramatic propriety, the Hindu commentators explain it
in this sense when it occurs in any such passage, for the real origin of
Karanā, viz., his procreation by the deity of the sun, became known after
his death.

223. The second line of 9 is read differently in the Calcutta edition. I
adopt the Bombay reading.

224. In the second line of 13, Avyayattūrṇam instead of Mahārājā is the
correct reading.

225. This slōkā seems to be a vicious one.

226. Yena and ṭēnā here are equal to yātrā and tatra.

227. In the first line of 30 Vaganaisa and not Vanagaṇana is the true
reading.

228. The second line of 30 is read differently in the Calcutta edition.
In consequence also of some differences between two printed editions, 30
of the Calcutta text is 32 of the Bombay text.

229. In the Bengal texts this is a triplet.

230. It is for this that I see thee with this head as a tribute.

231. An arani is a cubit measuring from the elbow to the end of the
little figure.

232. Both reading, viz., āsaktama and āsaktama are correct. The former
means ‘engaged’, the latter, ‘to the measure of his might!’

233. The second line of 85 is differently in the Bombay edition.

234. Rākṣasa at certain hours were believed to be inspired with greater
strength.

235. Maināka the son of Himāvata, has a hundred heads.

236. i.e., they thought they obtained a new lease of life.

237. Literally means, “united by Jarā.”

238. Nīlakaṁṭha thinks that Sagaḍāyā in one word, meaning ‘deprived of
the both Rākṣasa and the mace.’ This is far-fetched.

239. Phāyara being the mouth of the celestials, without phāyara, the celestials
become mouthless. Thus Nīlakaṁṭha.

240. This is a triplet in the Bengal texts.

241. 66 is a triplet in the Bengal texts.

242. Triyāmā, literally, consisting of three Yamōṁ, a Yāmā being a watch
of three hours. The first hour and a half of the night and the last hour
and a half, being regarded as twilight, the night, truly as such, with
the ancient Hindusa, consisted of only nine hours.

243. Literally, ‘of a thousand Yamōṁ.’

244. The moon is called the lord of lilies because the water-lily is seen
to bloom at moonrise, just as the sun is called the lord of the lotuses
because the lotus blooms at sun-rise. The direction presided over by
Indra means the East.

245. Dasatākāśā-kūpā means the Kakupa or direction presided by him of a
thousand eyes; hence the East.

246. Instead of Vr̥ṣōdarā, the Bombay text reads Vr̥ṣōttama, which I
adopt.

247. In the first line of 31, the Bengal texts read Rājanama probably
referring to Drupada. The correct reading, however, is Rajēndra in the
vocative case as in the Bombay edition.

248. I render this a little too freely. The form of the oath is, “Let
that man lose, etc. whom Drōṇa escapes today with life or whom Drōṇa
vaiṁkviśa today.”

249. This, in the Bengal texts, is a triplet.

250. I adopt the Bombay reading of the first line of this verse.

251. All these arrows inflicted had wounds and could not be easily
extracted. Shafts of crooked courses were condemned because the
combatants could not easily baffle them, not knowing at whom they would
fall.

252. This verse is omitted in the Bombay text. There can be no doubt,
however, about its genuineness.

253. The celestial weapons were all liviṁga agents that appeared at the
bidding of him who knew to invoke them. They abandoned, however, the
person whose death was imminent, although invoked with the usual formulae.

254. I adopt the Bombay reading.

255. Deprived of both the worlds, having sustained a defeat, they lost
this world, and flying away from the field, they committed a sina and lost
the next world.

256. Celestial weapons were invoked with maṁtrōṁ, as explained in a
previous note. They were forces which created all sorts of tangible
weapons that the invoked desired. Here the Brahma weapon took the form of
broad-headed arrows.

257. Dharmadhvajina literally means a person bearing the standard of
virtue, hence, hypocrite, sanctimoniously talking only virtue and
morality but acting differently.

258. I think the correct reading is aputrināsa and not putrīnāsa. If it is
putrīnāsa, literally rendered, the meaning is, ‘Why should persons having
children, feel any affection for the latter?’ It the worthy of remark
that the author of Vēṇīsaṁhāra has bodily adopted this verse, putting it
in the mouth of Asvatthamana when introduced in the third Act.

259. The last line of 37 is read differently in the Bombay edition.
Nīlakaṁṭha accepts that reading, and explains it in his gloss remarking
that the grammatical solecism occuring in it is a license. The Bengal
reading, however, is more apposite.

260. Literally, “the animals kept the Pāṁḍavōṁ to their right.”

261. Dasaratha’s son Rama, during his exile, slew the monkey-chief Bali,
the brother of Sugrīva, while Bali was engaged with Sugrīva in battle.
Bali had not done any injury to Rama. That act has always been regarded
as a stain on Rama.

262. I expand the original to make the sense clear.

263. The first line of the 23rd verse in the Bengal editions, is made the
second line of that verse in the Bombay text. There seems to be a
mistake, however, in both the texts. Vishnu slew Hiraṇyakaśipu without
allowing the latter to say anything unto him. Vide Vishnu Purānā. If
instead of Hiraṇyakaśipu Harīma, the rendering be Hiraṇyakaśipu Haris, the
line may then be connected with Bhima’s speech, and the comparison would
become more apposite.

264. The Niśādāsa were and to this day are the lowest caste in India.

265. The Bengal reading is vicious, I adopt the Bombay reading which is
Surōraguruṁśa bhūyōpī, meaning, “this preceptor again.” The fact is,
Arjuna was Satyakī’s preceptor; Drōṇa, therefore, was the latter’s
preceptor’s preceptor.

266. Kimpuruṣa were fabled creatures, half men and steeds. Not a
mountain but had its Kimpuruṣa, according to the Hindu belief. Yakṣōṁ
were a sort of superhuman beings inhabiting inaccessible hills and
mountains.

267. I adopt the Bombay reading of the 2nd line of 35 and think that
Nīlakaṁṭha explains it correctly.

268. I adopt the Bombay reading.

269. Nīlakaṁṭha explains this to mean that when he became unconnected
with the world, rising superior to everything connected with the world.

270. The terrible.

271. Amr̥tasya yonim, literally, the origin or cause of immortality,
i.e., he from whom immortality springs. Hence, as explained by
Nīlakaṁṭha, the phrase means the source of salvation, for those only that
are emancipate became immortal as the Supreme Soul itself.

272. i.e., the five attributes perceivable by the five senses, with the
five objects of Nature with which they are directly connected or in which
they manifest themselves.

273. Having given it away to Rama, his disciple.

274. All these terms imply Death or the Destroyer.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mahābhārata of Krishna-Dvaipāyana
Vyāsa, Volume 2

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAHĀBHĀRATA VOL 2 ***

***** This file should be named 15475-0.txt or 15475-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/4/7/15475/

Produced by John B. Harē. Please notify any corrections
to John B. Harē at www.sacred-texts.com


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from pablika domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Usē part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may usē this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with pablika domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USĒ THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Usē and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PĪJĪĒLAĒĒPHA), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the pablika domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the pablika domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the usē of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
rē-usē it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the pablika domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the usē of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your usē and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the usē of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already usē to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all usē of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
pablika domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MARCĒṀṬIBILIṬĪ OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pījīēlaēēpha.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a nôna profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pījīēlaēēpha.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Mēlana Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lēka City, UTA 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pījīēlaēēpha.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pījīēlaēēpha.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pījīēlaēēpha.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread pablika support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of pablika domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pījīēlaēēpha.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pījīēlaēēpha.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Pablika Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***


